===PAGE 1===
LITCHFIELD PARK
ZONING CODE
A Codification of the General Ordinances
of the City of Litchfield Park, Arizona
Updated since 2007 by
CODE PUBLISHING COMPANY
Seattle, Washington
publishing.inc 
===PAGE 2===
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 2,  6-07)
PREFACE
The Litchfield Park Zoning Code is a codification of the zoning
ordinances of the city of Litchfield Park, Arizona.
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates
specific code provisions by individual section numbers.
The supplement “directions” page, which should be retained at the
front of the book, indicates the last ordinance (and passage date thereof)
included with each supplement.
CODE PUBLISHING COMPANY
Seattle, Washington
(206) 527-6831
===PAGE 3===
How to Amend the Code
Code Structure and Organization
The code is organized using a 3-factor decimal numbering system which allows for additions between sec-
tions, chapters, and titles, without disturbing existing numbers. 
2 . 04 . 050
Title 
Chapter
Section
 
Typically, there are 9 vacant positions between sections; 4 positions between chapters, and several title 
numbers are “Reserved” to allow for codification of new material whose subject matter may be related to an 
existing title.
Ordinances of a general or public nature, or one imposing a fine, penalty or forfeiture, are codifiable. Prior 
to enacting a codifiable ordinance, ascertain whether the code already contains provisions on the topic.
Additions
If the proposed ordinance will add material not contained in the code, the ordinance will specify an “addi-
tion”; that is, a new title, chapter, section, or subsection, will be added. For example:
Section 1. Chapter 5.20, Taxicab Licenses, is added to read as follows:
-or-
Section 1. A new title, Title 18, Zoning, is added to read as follows:
A specific subsection can also be added when appropriate:
Section 2. Subsection D is added to Section 5.05.070, to read as follows:
Amendments
If the ordinance amends existing code provisions, specify the affected section or chapter numbers in the 
ordinance. This kind of amendment typically adds a section to an existing chapter, or amends an existing sec-
tion. Set out the entire section or subsection, not just the text (e.g., sentence) that was changed. For example: 
Section 1. Section 5.05.030 is amended to read as follows: 
-or-
Section 1. Section 5.05.035, Additional fees, is added to Chapter 5.05 to read as follows:
An ordinance can also amend a specific subsection of a code section:
Section 3. Subsection B of Section 5.05.070 is amended to read:
Repeals
Ordinances which repeal codified material should specify the code chapter, section, or subsection number. 
The chapter, section, or subsection numbers will be retained in the code, along with their title, as a record of 
ordinance activity (and as an explanation for gaps in the numbering sequence). The number of the repealed 
section or chapter number can be reused at a later time when desired. For example:
Section 2. Section 5.05.020, License, is repealed.
Renumbering
If the ordinance renumbers existing code provisions (either sections or subsections), identify how remain-
ing sections or subsections should be renumbered (or relettered).
Codification Assistance
Code Publishing Company can assist either in specifying code numbers or in providing remedies for other 
codification related problems free of charge. Please call us at (206) 527-6831.
===PAGE 4===
i (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 4,  2-08)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1 TITLE, PURPOSE AND CONSISTENCY
1.01 Title
1.02 Purpose
1.03 Intent
1.04 Consistency
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
2.01 Purpose
2.02 Word Usage
2.03 For Brevity of Text
2.04 Definitions
SECTION 3 ADMINISTRATION
3.01 Planning and Zoning Commission
3.02 Board of Adjustment
3.03 Zoning Administrator
3.04 Design Review Board
3.05 Appeals of Required Dedications and Exactions and of Zoning 
Regulations Pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 9-500.12 and 9-500.13
3.06 Reconsideration of Certain City Council Decisions
3.07 Changes in Land Use Laws
SECTION 4 AMENDMENTS
4.01 Introduction
4.02 Type of Amendment
4.03 Initiation of Amendment
4.04 Application for Amendment
4.05 Citizen Review Process
4.06 Notice of Public Hearing
4.07 Public Hearing by Commission on Applications
4.08 Protests Against Amendments
4.09 Reconsideration of Denied Map Amendments
4.10 General Plan Amendments
SECTION 5 FEES
5.01 Fee Schedule
5.03 Waiver or Refund
5.04 Impact Fees
===PAGE 5===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ii (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 9, 3-11)
SECTION 6 INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT
6.01 Interpretation
6.02 Conflict
SECTION 7 SAVING CLAUSE AND EFFECTIVE DATE
7.01 Saving
7.02 Effective Date
SECTION 8 VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
8.01 Invalid Permits and Approvals
8.02 City Reliance on Information Supplied
8.03 Code Enforcement Officer
8.04 Enforcement Responsibilities
8.05 Violation; Notice and Opportunity to Correct
8.06 Violations and Citations
8.07 Penalties
8.08 Habitual Offenders
8.09 Cumulative Procedures and Remedies
8.10 Failure to Provide Evidence of Identity
SECTION 9 DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES THEREOF
9.01 Purpose
9.02 Boundaries and Map
9.03 Annexation
9.04 Boundary Line
9.05 General Conditions
9.06 Map Appended
9.07 Overlay Districts
SECTION 10 RESIDENTIAL ESTATE (RE) DISTRICT
10.01 Land Use Definition
10.02 Use Regulations
10.03 Property Development Standards
10.04 Height Regulations
10.05 Setback Regulations
10.06 Additional Regulations
SECTION 11 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1) DISTRICT
11.01 Land Use Definition
11.02 Use Regulations
11.03 Property Development Standards
===PAGE 6===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
iii (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 2,  6-07)
11.04 Height Regulations
11.05 Setback Regulations
11.06 Additional Regulations
SECTION 12 LOW MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1-15) DISTRICT
12.01 Land Use Definition
12.02 Use Regulations
12.03 Property Development Standards
12.04 Height Regulations
12.05 Setback Regulations
12.06 Additional Regulations
SECTION 13 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1-8) DISTRICT
13.01 Land Use Definition
13.02 Use Regulations
13.03 Property Development Standards
13.04 Height Regulations
13.05 Setback Regulations
13.06 Additional Regulations
SECTION 14 HIGH MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1-6) DISTRICT
14.01 Land Use Definition
14.02 Use Regulations
14.03 Property Development Standards
14.04 Height Regulations
14.05 Setback Regulations
14.06 Additional Regulations
SECTION 15 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (RC Cluster) DISTRICT
15.01 Land Use Definition
15.02 Use Regulations
15.03 Property Development Standards
15.04 Height Regulations
15.05 Setback Regulations
15.06 Additional Regulations
SECTION 16 LOW DENSITY MULTIFAMILY (MFL) DISTRICT
16.01 Land Use Definition
16.02 Use Regulations
16.03 Property Development Standards
===PAGE 7===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
iv (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 2,  6-07)
16.04 Height Regulations
16.05 Setback Regulations
16.06 Residential Condominium Projects
16.07 Additional Regulations
16.08 Violation; Penalty
SECTION 17 MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIFAMILY (MFM) DISTRICT
17.01 Land Use Definition
17.02 Use Regulations
17.03 Property Development Standards
17.04 Height Regulations
17.05 Setback Regulations
17.06 Residential Condominium Projects
17.07 Additional Regulations
17.08 Violation; Penalty
SECTION 18 HIGH DENSITY MULTIFAMILY (MFH) DISTRICT
18.01 Land Use Definition
18.02 Use Regulations
18.03 Property Development Standards
18.04 Height Regulations
18.05 Setback Regulations
18.06 Residential Condominium Projects
18.07 Additional Regulations
18.08 Violation; Penalty
SECTION 19 PATIO HOME RESIDENTIAL (PH) DISTRICT
19.01 Land Use Definition
19.02 Use Regulations
19.03 Property Development Standards
19.04 Height Regulations
19.05 Setback Regulations
19.06 Additional Regulations
SECTION 20 RESORT (RT) DISTRICT
20.01 Land Use Definition
20.02 Use Regulations
20.03 Property Development Standards
20.04 Additional Regulations
===PAGE 8===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
v (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 7,  6-09)
SECTION 21 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC) DISTRICT
21.01 Land Use Definition
21.02 Use Regulations
21.03 Property Development Standards
21.04 Height Regulations
21.05 Setback Regulations
21.06 Additional Regulations
SECTION 22 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (CS) DISTRICT
22.01 Land Use Definition
22.02 Use Regulations
22.03 Property Development Standards
22.04 Height Regulations
22.05 Setback Regulations
22.06 Additional Regulations
SECTION 23 REGIONAL COMMERCIAL (RS) DISTRICT
23.01 Land Use Definition
23.02 Use Regulations
23.03 Property Development Standards
23.04 Height Regulations
23.05 Setback Regulations
23.06 Additional Regulations
SECTION 24 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (I) DISTRICT
24.01 Land Use Definition
24.02 Use Regulations
24.03 Property Development Standards
24.04 Height Regulations
24.05 Setback Regulations
24.06 Additional Regulations
SECTION 25 OPEN SPACE (OS) DISTRICT
25.01 Land Use Definition
25.02 Use Regulations
25.03 Additional Regulations
25.04 District Changes and Rezoning
===PAGE 9===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
vi (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 22, 12-19)
SECTION 26 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICT
26.01 Land Use Definition
26.02 Application Requirements
26.03 Design Criteria an d Development Standards
26.04 Property Development Standards Modification Procedure
SECTION 27 PUBLIC FACILITIES (PF) DISTRICT
27.01 Land Use Definition
27.02 Use Regulations
27.03 Property Development Standards
27.04 Height Regulations
27.05 Setback Regulations
27.06 Additional Regulations
27.07 Continuum of Care Developments
SECTION 27A AGRITOURISM (AT) DISTRICT
27A.01 Land Use Definition
27A.02 Use Regulations
27A.03 Property Development Standards
27A.04 Height Regulations
27A.05 Setback Regulations
27A.06 Additional Regulations
SECTION 27B COMMERCIAL-FLEX (CF) DISTRICT
27B.01 Land Use Definition
27B.02 Use Regulations
27B.03 Property Development Standards
SECTION 27C CITY CENTER (CTR) DISTRICT
27C.01 Land Use Definition
27C.02 Use Regulations
27C.03 Property Development Standards
27C.04 Design Criteria
SECTION 28 ZONING MATRIX/DIS TRICT REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY
SECTION 29 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
29.01 Applicability
29.02 Purpose and Intent
29.03 Definitions
===PAGE 10===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
vi-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 22, 12-19)
29.04 Requirements fo r Off-Street Parking
29.05 Location of Required Pa rking Spaces and Parking Areas
29.06 Calculation of Requir ed Off-Street Parking
29.07 Dimensions and Circulation
29.08 General Design Requirements
29.09 Parking Area Surfacing Improvements
===PAGE 11===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
vii (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
29.10 Handicapped Parking
29.11 Parking Restrictions for Residential Uses
29.12 Off-Street Loading Requirements
29.13 Parking Matrix
29.14 Violation; Penalties
SECTION 30 WALLS, LANDSCAPING AND FENCES
30.01 Gateway Treatments
30.02 Height
30.03 Right-of-way or Easement
30.04 Property Ow ner Responsibility
30.05 Landscaping Design Standards and Requirements
SECTION 31 GENERAL PROVISIONS
31.01 Intent
31.02 Special Height Regulations
31.03 Accessory Uses and Structures
31.04 Screening of Non-Principal Uses
31.05 Structures in Yard Areas
31.06 Exceptions to  Yard Regulations
31.07 Porches and Patios
31.08 Yard Regulations for Cluster Residences
31.09 Temporary Buildings
31.10 Distance Between Buildings
31.11 Storage
31.12 Adjustments of Yard Regulation
31.13 Safety Considerations
31.14 Prohibition of Time-Share Projects
31.15 Lighting
31.16 Drainage
31.17 Group Living Facilities
31.18 Yard Sales
31.19 Environmental Concerns
31.20 Pathway Improvement Standards
31.21 Medical Marijuana
31.22 Solar Energy Collector Panels
31.23 Wireless Facilities in the Right-of-Way
31.24 Recreational Marijuana
===PAGE 12===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
vii-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
SECTION 32 NONCONFORMING USES
32.01 Continued Use
32.02 Alterations
32.03 Prohibition Agains t Reuse/Discontinuance
32.04 Special Circumstances
SECTION 33 USE PERMITS
33.01 Purpose
33.02 Review Procedures
33.03 Revocation of Use Permit
33.04 Automatic Termination of Use Permit
SECTION 34 VARIANCES
34.01 Application
34.02 Findings and Actions by the Board of Adjustment
34.03 Alternative Prevailing Standards
SECTION 35 SIGNS
35.01 Purpose and Objectives
35.02 Definitions
35.03 General Requirements
35.04 Comprehensive Sign Program
35.05 Sign Standards
35.06 Resort Sign Standards
35.07 Prohibited Signs
35.08 Temporary Signage
35.09 Flagpole Requirements
35.10 Nonconforming Signs
35.11 Violation; Enforcement
SECTION 36 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
36.01 Purpose
36.02 Permitted Locations of WCFs
36.03 WCFs Permitted by Use Permit
36.04 Site and Construction Standards
36.05 Co-Location
36.06 Radio Frequency Standa rds; Interference; Noise
36.07 Applicant’s Submittal Requirements
36.08 Approval Process
36.09 Permit Term and Limitations
===PAGE 13===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
viii (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
36.10 Renewal of Permit
36.11 Applicability
SECTION 37 SITE PLAN REVIEW
37.01 Site Plan Review
37.02 Application Requirements
37.03 Review Criteria
37.04 Site Plan Appeals
SECTION 38 PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT PLANS
38.01 Protected Development Right Plans
SECTION 39 DESIGN REVIEW GUIDELINES
39.01 Architectural Design for Single-Family Residential Uses
39.02 Architectural Design fo r Multifamily Residential Uses
39.03 Architectural Design for Commercial and Industrial Uses
39.04 Site Design for Commercial and Industrial Uses
===PAGE 14===
SECTION 1 
TITLE, PURPOSE AND 
CONSISTENCY 
Subsections: 
1.01 Title 
1.02 Purpose 
1.03 Intent 
1.04 Consistency 
1.01 Title 
This code shall be known and cited as the 
Litchfield Park Zoning Code (short title: Zon­
ing Code). 
1.02 Purpose 
These regulations are adopted for the fol­
lowing purposes: 
a. To protect and provide for the public 
health, safety, and general welfare of the city. 
b. To implement the city's general plan. 
c. To provide for adequate light, air, and 
privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood, and 
other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of 
the land and undue congestion of population. 
d. To protect the character and the soci_al 
and economic stability of all parts of the city. 
e. To encourage the orderly and beneficial 
development of all parts of the city. 
f. To protect and conserve both the value 
of land and the improvements thereon 
throughout the city. 
g. To guide public and private policy and 
action in order to ensure adequate and effi­
cient transportation, water, sewage, schools, 
parks, playgrounds, recreation and other pub­
lic requirements and facilities. 
h. To provide the most beneficial relation­
ship between the uses of land and buildings. 
1.01 
1. To establish reasonable standards of 
design and procedures for subdivisions and 
redesigned subdivisions. 
j. To prevent the pollution of air and 
water; and to encourage the wise use of 
management of natural resources throughout 
the city. 
k. To preserve the natural beauty and 
topography of the city and to ensure appro­
priate development with regard to these natu­
ral features. 
I. To provide for open spaces. 
(Ord. 04-91 § I (part)) 
1.03 Intent 
It is the intent of this code not to interfere 
with, abrogate, or annul any easement, cove­
nant or other agreement between parties; pro­
vided, however, that where this code imposes 
a greater restriction upon the use of buildings, 
structures or land, the provisions of this code 
shall prevail. 
1.04 Consistency 
Actions initiated under this code shall be 
consistent with all applicable state and federal 
laws and regulations. 
(Litchfield Pruk Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 15===
2.01
2 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 10,  6-11)
SECTION 2
DEFINITIONS
Subsections:
2.01 Purpose
2.02 Word Usage
2.03 For Brevity of Text
2.04 Definitions
2.01 Purpose
It is the purpose of this section to define
words, terms, and phrases contained within this
code.
2.02 Word Usage
a. Words used or defined in one tense or
form shall include other tenses and derivative
forms.
b. Words in the singular number shall
include the plural number, and words in the
plural number shall include the singular num-
ber.
c. The masculine gender shall include the
feminine, and the feminine gender shall include
the masculine.
d. The word “shall” is mandatory.
e. The word “may” is permissive.
f. The word “person” includes individu-
als, firms, corporations, associations, trusts,
and any other similar entities.
g. In case of any difference of meaning or
implication between the text of this code and
any caption, illustration, or table, the text shall
control.
2.03 For Brevity of Text
a. Commission
The Litchfield Park Planning and Zoning
Commission.
b. Council
The Litchfield Park City Council.
2.04 Definitions
When used in this code, the following terms
shall have the meanings herein ascribed to
them:
Abut To physically touch or border upon or
to share a common boundary, property line, or
right-of-way.
Access The place, means, or ways by which
pedestrians, vehicles, or both shall have safe,
adequate, and usable ingress/egress to a prop-
erty or use. A private access is an access not in
public ownership and controlled by means of
deed, dedication, or easement.
Accessory Dwelling Unit  A dwelling unit
on the same lot with and of a nature customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use
of the land or building and located on the same
lot with such principal use or building.
Accessory Structure  A subordinate struc-
ture located on the same lot as the principal
building.
Accessory Structure, Habitable A perma-
nent enclosed accessory structure used for a
noncommercial workshop or recreational
activities, or a domicile for relatives of the
owner or lessee of the principal building.
Accessory Structure, Screened  An acces-
sory structure inside a perimeter, opaque
fenced yard, with a height less than the height
of the opaque perimeter fence and not visible
from public areas or neighboring properties.
Accessory Structure, Shade  An unen-
closed accessory structure that provides shade.
A tent used for shade purposes is a shade acces-
sory structure.
Accessory Structure, Storage  An acces-
sory structure used for storing household items
and vehicles.
===PAGE 16===
2.04
3 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 16, 2-15)
Accessory Use  A use of land or structure
subordinate to the principal use or building on
a lot and serving a purpose customarily inci-
dental to the use of the principal building, pro-
vided any such use of land or structure is
established or built with or after the construc-
tion of the principal building.
Acre A measure of land containing 43,560
square feet.
Addition An extension or increase in floor
area or height of a building or structure.
Adjacent Within five feet of a structure.
Adjoining Lot or Land  A lot or parcel of
land which shares all or part of a common lot
line with another lot or parcel of land.
Agent Any person, firm, partnership, asso-
ciation, joint venture, corporation, or any other
entity or combination of entities who rep-
resents or acts for or on behalf of a declarant.
Agricultural Use The production, keeping
or maintenance for sale, lease or personal use
of plants or animals useful to man, including
but not limited to forages and sod crops, grains
and seed crops, dairy animals and dairy prod-
ucts, poultry and poultr y products, livestock,
including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses,
ponies, mules, or goats or any mutations or
hybrids thereof, including the breeding and
grazing of any or all such animals, bees and api-
ary products, fur animals, trees and forest prod-
ucts, fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts,
and berries, vegetables, nursery, floral, orna-
mental and greenhouse products or lands
devoted to a soil conservation or forestry man-
agement program.
Agritainment Farm-based entertainment
including activities such as hayrides, wine tast-
ing, cornfield-maze contests, harvest festivals,
U-pick, tours, on-farm classes, fairs, festivals,
pumpkin patches, community gardens, Christ-
mas tree farms, social/corporate events,
orchard dinners, youth camps, and barn dances.
“Agritainment” may include farming, growing,
and crop-harvesting activities.
Agritourism A commercial and educational
enterprise, which may include some product
processing, that allows members of the general
public, for recreational, entertainment, or edu-
cational purposes, to view or enjoy rural activ-
ities, including farming, historic, cultural,
harvest-your-own activities, or natural activi-
ties and attractions.
Air Pollution The presence of contaminants
in the air of concentrations that interfere
directly or indirectly with man’s health, safety,
or comfort, or with the full use and enjoyments
of his property.
Aisle The travel way by which cars enter and
depart parking spaces.
Alley A dedicated right-of-way providing a
secondary means of public access to abutting
property and not intended for general traffic
circulation.
Alteration An alteration may be a change in
construction or a change in occupancy. Where
the term of alteration is applied to a change of
construction, it is intended to apply to any
change, addition, or mo dification in construc-
tion. When the term is used in connection with
a change of occupancy, it  is intended to apply
to changes of occupancy from one trade or use
to another.
Amusement and Recreation Services
Establishments engage d in providing amuse-
ment or entertainment for fee or admission
charge and including such activities as dance
halls, studios, theatrical productions, bands,
orchestras, and other musical entertainment,
bowling alleys, and billiard and pool establish-
ments, commercial sports such as arenas, rings,
===PAGE 17===
2.04
3-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 16, 2-15)
racetracks, public golf courses, and coin-oper-
ated devices, amusement parks, membership
sports and recreation clubs, swimming pools,
riding clubs, carnival op erations, expositions,
game parlors, and horse shows.
Animal Hospital The place where animals
or pets are given medical or surgical treatment
and the boarding of animals is limited to short-
term care incidental to the hospital use.
Animal Kennel Any structure or premises
where animals are kept, boarded, bred, trained
or sold for commercial gain.
Antenna The specific device used to receive
or transmit radio signals.
Apartment One building or portion thereof
which is designed, built,  rented, or leased to
occupy residents of three or more families liv-
ing independently of each other and doing their
own cooking on the same premises.
Apartment Unit One or more rooms with a
private bath and kitchen facilities comprising
an independent, self-contained dwelling unit in
a building which contains three or more dwell-
ing units.
Applicant A person submitting an applica-
tion for development, rezoning or other action.
Approval, Conditional  An affirmative
action by the commission and council indicat-
ing that approval of a preliminary plat or plan
will be forthcoming upon satisfaction of certain
specified stipulations.
Approval, Final Unconditional  Approval
of a preliminary plat or plan by the commission
and council as evidenced by meeting minutes
and noted upon copies of the preliminary plat
or plan.
===PAGE 18===
2.04
4 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 2,  6-07)
Attention-Getting Device  A device
designed or intended to attract by noise and/or
a sudden, intermittent, or rhythmic movement,
physical change or lighting change, such as
banners, flags, streamers, balloons, propellers,
whirligigs, search lights, and flashing lights.
Automatic Car Wash A structure contain-
ing facilities for washing automobiles using a
chain conveyor or other method of moving the
cars along and an automatic or semi-automatic
application of cleaner, brushes, rinse water and
heat for drying.
Automobile Repair Services and Garages
Establishments primarily engaged in furnish-
ing automotive repair, rental, leasing, and park-
ing services to the general public.
Automobile Sales The use of any building,
land area, or other premises for the display and
sale of new or used automobiles, panel trucks,
vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles and includ-
ing any warranty repair work and other repair
service conducted as any accessory use.
Automobile Service Station Any building,
land area, or other premises or portion thereof
used, or intended to be used, for the retail dis-
pensing or sales of vehicular fuels, including,
as an accessory use, the sale and installation of
lubricants, batteries, tires and similar accesso-
ries.
Automobile Wrecking Yard See Junkyard.
Balanced Basin  A drainage basin which
contains floodwater channels, natural or man-
made and/or flood control structures that are
adequate to contain existing runoff from the
base storm produced by the basin; but in which
additional runoff cannot be safely contained by
said channels or structures.
Bar An establishment including, but not
limited to, a cocktail lounge, discotheque, night
club or tavern, the main use of which is to serve
spirituous liquors for on-site consumption.
Such a facility may serve food, provide dancing
and entertainment.
Base Flood The flood having a one percent
chance of being equalled or exceeded in any
given year.
Base Map A map having sufficient points of
reference such as state, county, or municipal
boundary lines, streets, easements, and other
selected physical features to allow the plotting
of any other data.
Basement A space having one-half or more
of its floor to ceiling height below the average
level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-
to-ceiling height of not less than six and one-
half feet.
Bed Tax A tax imposed pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 9-500.06.
Bedroom A private room planned and
intended for sleeping, separable from other
rooms by a door and accessible to a bathroom.
Berm A mound of earth or the act of pushing
earth into a mound.
Block That property abutting one side of the
street and lying between the two nearest inter-
secting streets or nearest intersecting street on
subdivided land.
Boarding House A dwelling in which three,
four, or five rooms are occupied as guest rooms
and in which food may be served to the occu-
pants thereof. Any dwelling in which more than
five rooms are occupied as guest rooms shall be
deemed to be a motel or hotel. A boarding
house shall not include buildings for persons
requiring physical or mental care by reasons of
age, infirmity, or disease.
Breakaway Wall A wall that is not part of
the structural support of the building and is
intended through its design and construction to
===PAGE 19===
2.04
5 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 27, 4-24)
collapse under special lateral loading forces,
without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building supporting foundation system.
Buildable Area The area of a lot remaining
after the minimum yard and open space
requirements have been met.
Building Any structure, either temporary or
permanent, having a roof, supported by col-
umns or walls, and used or built for the shelter
or enclosure of persons,  animals, channels, or
property of any kind. This shall include tents,
awnings, or vehicles situated on private prop-
erty and used for the purposes of building.
Building Coverage  The horizontal area
measured within the outside of the exterior
walls on the ground floor of all principal and
accessory buildings on a lot.
Building Height The vertical distance of a
building measured from the lowest grade adja-
cent to the building to th e highest point of the
roof, fascia, or parapet.
Building Line A line parallel to the street
line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth
of the front yard required for the zoning district
in which the lot is located.
Building Permit  Written permission
required by the city for the construction, repair,
alteration, addition, removal or demolition to a
building or structure.
Building, Principal A building in which is
conducted the principal use of the lot on which
it is located.
Bulk Storage  The storage of chemicals,
petroleum products, and other materials and
aboveground containers for subsequent resale
to distributors or retail dealers or outlets.
Carport A roofed structure providing space
for the parking or storage of motor vehicles and
entirely open on two or more sides.
Certificate of Occupancy  A document
issued by the building official allowing the
occupancy or use of a building after receipt of
evidence that the building has been constructed
and will be used in compliance with all appli-
cable codes and requirem ents of the city, and
that all required site improvements or public
improvements have been completed.
Change of Use Any use which differs from
the previous use of a building or land.
Child Care Center A private facility main-
tained for the purpose of providing care, super-
vision or training for five or more children
under the age of sixteen years and not related
to the proprietor, for periods of more than one
hour but less than twenty-four hours per day
apart from their parents or guardians, for com-
pensation.
Chimney A structure containing one or
more flues for drawing off emissions from sta-
tionary sources of combustion.
Church A permanently located building or
groups of buildings or structure wherein people
regularly assemble for religious worship and
which is maintained a nd controlled by a reli-
gious body to sustain public worship and
church-related uses. This definition pertains, as
well, to temporary facilities.
Clinic An establishment where patients are
admitted for examination and treatment by one
or more physicians, dentists, psychologists or
social workers and where patients are not usu-
ally lodged overnight.
Club A group of people organized for a
common purpose to pursue common goals,
interests, and activities, and usually character-
ized by certain membership qualifications,
payment of fees and dues, regular meetings, a
constitution and bylaws.
===PAGE 20===
2.04
6 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 27, 4-24)
Co-Location The use of a single support
structure and/or site by more than one telecom-
munications provider.
Commercial Vehicle  Any motor vehicle
licensed by the state as a commercial vehicle.
Common Accessway A commonly shared
or used pedestrian or vehicular way that con-
nects or serves two or more properties.
Common Ownership Ownership by one or
more individuals.
Community Facility A public place where
members of the community gather for various
activities, which may be recreational, educa-
tional, artistic, social, or cultural. Community
facilities can include buildings, equipment
areas, lands, or grounds used for these public
purposes.
Condominium Association A declarant or
other person who owns a unit or, unless other-
wise provided in the lease, a lessee of a unit in
a leasehold condominium whose lease expires
simultaneously with any lease the expiration or
termination of which will remove the unit from
the condominium but does not include a person
having an interest in a unit solely as security for
an obligation. In the case of a contract for con-
veyance as defined in A.R.S. § 33-741, of real
property, unit owner means the purchaser of the
unit.
Condominium Project  Real estate, por-
tions of which are designated for separate own-
ership and the remainder of which is designated
for common ownership solely by the owners of
the separate portions. Re al estate is not a con-
dominium unless the undivided interests in the
common elements are vested in the unit own-
ers.
Condominium Unit A portion of a condo-
minium project designated for separate owner-
ship.
Construction Permit See Building Permit.
Consume and Consumption For purposes
of Section 31.24, mean s the act of ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing recreational
marijuana into the human body.
Consumer For purposes of Section 31.24,
means a person who purchases recreational
marijuana for personal use, who is at least
twenty-one years of age, and who purchases
recreational marijuana in  accordance with the
Smart and Safe Arizona Act.
Contiguous In contact with.
Continuance Postponement or adjourn-
ment to a later date.
Convalescent Home A residential medical
facility intended to provide residential medical
and skilled nursing care for persons recovering
from surgery, injury, or illness.
Court A space, open and unobstructed to the
sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and
bounded on three or more sides by walls of a
building.
Critical Basin A drainage basin which con-
tains floodwater channels, natural or man-
made and/or flood control structures that can-
not contain existing runoff produced by the
base flood within the basin, and which has a
documented history of severe flooding hazards.
Critical Feature  An integral and readily
identifiable part of a flood protection system
without which the flood protection provided by
the entire system would be compromised.
Cul-de-sac See Street, Cul-de-sac.
Cultivate and Cultivation For purposes of
Section 31.24, means to propagate, breed,
grow, prepare, and package recreational mari-
juana.
Curb Cut The opening along the curb line
at which point vehicles may enter or leave the
roadway.
===PAGE 21===
2.04
6-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 27, 4-24)
Decibel A unit for expressing the relative
intensity of sounds from zero (average least
perceptible) to one hu ndred thirty (average
pain level).
Dedication The designation of land by its
owner for any general or public use.
Density The number of dwelling units per
unit of land.
Department For purposes of Section 31.24,
means the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services or its successor agency.
Detention Basin A storage facility for the
temporary storage of stormwater runoff with
metered discharge.
===PAGE 22===
2.04
7 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
Detention System A type of flood control
system which delays the downstream progress
of flood waters in a controlled manner, gener-
ally through the combined use of a temporary
storage area and a metered outlet device which
causes a lengthening of the duration of flow,
and thereby reduces downstream flood peaks.
Developer The legal or beneficial owner or
owners of a lot or of any land included in a pro-
posed development incl uding a holder of an
option or contract to purchase or other persons
having enforceable, proprietary interests in
such land.
Development, Special Flood Hazard Area
Any man-made change to improved or unim-
proved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations located within  the area of special
flood hazard.
Developmentally Disabled A person who
has autism, cerebral palsy, epilepsy or mental
retardation, as provided for by A.R.S. § 36-
581.
Display Surface The area made available by
a sign for the purpose of displaying a message.
District A portion of the city within which
certain uniform regulations and requirements
or various combinations thereof apply under
the provisions of this code.
Drainage
a. Surface water runoff.
b. The removal of surface water from land
by drains, grading, or other means which
include run-off controls to minimize erosion
and sedimentation during and after construc-
tion or development. The means for preserving
the water supply and the prevention or allevia-
tion of flooding.
Drainageway Any natural or artificial
watercourse, trench, ditc h, swale, or similar
depression into which surface water flows.
Driveway A private roadway providing
access for vehicles to a parking space or park-
ing lot, garage, dwelling, or other structure.
Dual Licensee  For purposes of Section
31.24, means an entity that holds both a non-
profit medical marijuana dispensary registra-
tion and a marijuana establishment license.
Dwelling An enclosed space providing
complete independent living facilities for a
family including permanent provisions for liv-
ing, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. A
split-off unit is not a dwelling.
Dwelling, Attached A one-family dwelling
attached to one or mo re one-family dwellings
by common vertical walls.
Dwelling, Detached  A dwelling which is
not attached to any other dwelling by any
means.
Dwelling, Multifamily A building designed
exclusively for occupancy by three or more
families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, Semi-Detached  A one-family
dwelling unit attached to another one-family
dwelling by comm on vertical wall in which
each dwelling is located on a separate lot.
Dwelling, Single-Family  A building con-
taining one dwelling unit. A dwelling which is
designed for and not occupied by more than
one family and surrounded by open space or
yards and which is not attached to any other
building by any means.
Egress An exit.
Elevation
a. A vertical distance above or below a
fixed reference level.
b. A flat scale drawing of the front, rear, or
side of a building.
===PAGE 23===
2.04
7-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
Enclosed Area A building, greenhouse, or
other structure that:
a. Has a complete roof enclosure sup-
ported by connecting walls that are constructed
of solid material extending from the ground to
the roof;
b. Is secure against unauthorized entry;
c. Has a foundation, slab or equivalent
base to which the floor is securely attached; and
d. Meets performance standards ensuring
that cultivation and pr ocessing activities can-
not be and are not perceptible from the struc-
ture in terms of not being visible from public
view without using binoculars, aircraft or other
optical aids and is equipped with a lock or other
security device that prevents access by minors.
Equipment Cabinet A small structure used
to house and protect the equipment necessary
for processing telecommunications signals.
Associated equipment may include air condi-
tioning and emergency generators. An equip-
ment cabinet shall not exceed eight feet in
height.
Existing Grade or Elevation  The vertical
location of the ground surface prior to excavat-
ing or filling.
Existing Use The use of a lot or structure at
the time of the enactment of this code.
Facade The exterior wall of a building
exposed to public view or that wall viewed by
persons not within the building.
Family Any person living alone or any of
the following groups living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling:
a. An individual or two or more persons
related by blood, marriage, or adoption, guard-
ianship, or other duly and legally authorized 
===PAGE 24===
2.04
8 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
custodial relationship living together as a sin-
gle housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit;
b.  Not more than two unrelated persons
and their children and foster children; or
c. Not more than five persons, who need
not be related, living together as a single house-
keeping unit within a dwelling unit.
Family Group Home A group living facil-
ity licensed by the Arizona Department of
Health Services or any successor agency for the
operation of an assisted living home for per-
sons with disabilities. “Family group home”
does not include structured sober living homes. 
Farmers Market, Outdoor A market at
which predominantly farmers and producers
sell agricultural products and other items
directly to the general public. These items may
include fresh fruits, vegetables, meat products,
dairy, grains, and originally packaged ready-
to-eat items such as nuts, honeys, oils, and
juices. Sellers of other goods and services may
comprise up to twenty percent of the total num-
ber of vendors. Second hand sales of clothing,
household items, or other used goods is prohib-
ited.
Fast Food Service The retail sale in a build-
ing of convenience food or specialty menu
items, and ordered and served at a counter or
window, whether for consumption on or off the
premises, when the facility is designed primar-
ily to serve customers arriving by automobile.
Fence An artificially constructed barrier of
any material or comb ination of materials
erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
Findings A written statement of facts, con-
clusions and determinations based on the evi-
dence presented in relation to the approval
criteria and prepared by the approval authority
in support of a decision.
Floor Area, Gross  The sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of a build-
ing measured from the exterior face of exterior
walls, or from the centerline of a wall separat-
ing two buildings but not including interior
parking spaces, loading space for motor vehi-
cles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling
height is less than six feet.
Floor Area, Livable  The total interior liv-
ing space of a residen tial dwelling unit within
the walls proper of the structure or unit, exclud-
ing open porches, patios, garages, basements
and storage or equipment rooms.
Floor Area, Net The total of all floor areas
of a building, excluding stairwells and elevator
shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular
parking or loading; and all floors below the first
or ground floor when used or intended to be
used for human habitation or service to the pub-
lic.
Fraternal Organization A group of people
formally organized for a common interest, usu-
ally cultural, religious or entertainment, with
regular meetings, rituals, and formal written
membership requirements.
Frontage That portion of a parcel of prop-
erty which abuts a public street.
Gateway Treatment A combination of wall
signs, structure and landscaping consisting of
trees, shrubbery and ground cover designed to
identify and introduce entry into the city or a
planned development to passersby.
Grade The lowest point of elevation of the
finished surface of the ground, paving or side-
walk within the area between the building and
the property line, or when the property line is
more than five feet from the building, between
the building and line five feet from the build-
ing.
===PAGE 25===
2.04
9 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 27, 4-24)
Grade, Finished The final elevation of the
ground surface after development.
Grade, Natural The elevation of the ground
surface in its natural state, before man-made
alterations.
Group Living Facility A residential living
arrangement for unrelated persons with a dis-
ability who provide mu tual support to each
other and where support services may be pro-
vided by the staff of the group living facility.
Residents may be self-governing or supervised
by a sponsoring entity or its staff which pro-
vides habilitative or rehabilitative services
related to the disabilities of the residents. Its
primary purpose is to provide shelter in a fam-
ily-like environment; treatment is incidental as
in any home. Inter-relatio nships between resi-
dents are an essential component. A group liv-
ing facility is consider ed a residential use of
property for purposes of all zoning and build-
ing codes. The term does not include any other
group living arrangement for unrelated individ-
uals who are not disabled nor residential facil-
ities for prison pre-parolees or sex offenders.
Guesthouse A permanent habitable acces-
sory structure used as sleeping quarters by fam-
ily, servants or temporary guests of the owner
or lessee of the principal building.
Height For the purpose of determining the
height limits in all zones set forth in this code
and shown on the official zoning map, the
datum shall be above grade elevation unless
otherwise specified.
Home Occupation A lawful use conducted
in or on the premises of a dwelling unit by the
permanent residents thereof, only said use
being secondary to the use of the dwelling pur-
poses, and which complies with the terms and
conditions of this code.
Hookah Bar  An establishment that pro-
vides a smoking device consisting of a bowl
mounted on a vessel of water which is provided
with a long tube and arranged so that the smoke
is drawn through the water.
Hospital An institution providing primary
health services and medical or surgical care to
persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from
illness, disease, injury , deformity and other
abnormal physical or mental conditions, and
including as an integral part of the institution,
related facilities such as laboratories, outpa-
tient facilities or training facilities.
Hotel A facility offering transient lodging
accommodations to the general public and may
provide additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, and recreation facilities.
Ingress Access or entry.
Inoperable Vehicle Any vehicle that is par-
tially or wholly dismantled, discarded,
wrecked, or on blocks, stands or similar
devices, or stripped or scrapped, or inoperable
due to mechanical disassembly, or that has a
deflated tire or tires, or that is physically inca-
pable of operation, or that cannot be operated
for other reasons. For the purposes of this zon-
ing code, a parked vehicle that displays regis-
tration which is expired by more than one
month shall be deemed to be an inoperable
vehicle.
Junkyard Any area, lot, land, parcel, build-
ing, structure or part thereof used for the stor-
age, collection, proces sing, purchase, sale or
abandonment of waste paper rags, scrap metal
or other scrap or discarded goods, materials,
machinery or two or more unregistered, inop-
erable motor vehicles or other type of junk.
Key Lot A lot adjacent to a corner lot having
its side lot line in common with the rear lot line
of the corner lot and fronting on the street
===PAGE 26===
2.04
9-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 27, 4-24)
which forms the side boundary of the corner
lot.
Land Use Law Means any statute, rule,
ordinance, resolution or law enacted by this
state or a political subdivision of this state that
regulates the use of land or any interest in land
or that regulates accepted farming or forestry
practices.
Landscaping Shall consist of any of the fol-
lowing or combination thereof: material such
as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers,
shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms; and non-
living durable material commonly used in land-
scaping, such as, but not limited to,
decomposed granite, ro cks, pebbles, sand,
boulders, walls or fences, paving, and artificial
grass/turf.
Levee A man-made structure, usually an
earthen embankment, designed and con-
structed in accordance with sound engineering
practices to contain, control, or divert the flow
of water so as to provide protection from tem-
porary flooding.
Livestock Meat animals, cattle, sheep,
swine, horses, ponies or goats, or any mutations
or hybrids thereof.
Lot The smallest platted parcel of real prop-
erty created by a legal subdivision.
Lot Area The total area within the boundary
lines of a lot.
Lot Coverage That portion of the lot that is
covered by buildings and structures.
Lot Line  A line of record bounding a lot
which divides one lot from another lot or from
a public or private street or any other public
space.
===PAGE 27===
2.04
10 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 20, 6-18)
Lot Width The horizontal distance between
the side lines of a lot measured at right angles
to its depth along a straight line parallel to the
front lot line at the minimum required building
setback.
a. If the side lot lines are parallel, the short-
est distance between these side lines.
b. If the side lot lines are not parallel, the
width of the lot shall be the length of a line mea-
sured at right angles to the axis of the lot at a
point which is equal to or greater than the
required front yard setback for the district in
which located. The axis of a lot shall be a line
joining the midpoints o f the front and rear lot
lines.
Maintain To cause or allow to continue in
existence; when the context indicates, maintain
shall mean to preserve and care for a structure,
improvement, condition or area so that it
remains attractive, safe and presentable and
carries out the purposes for which it was
installed, constructed or required.
Manufactured Home or Housing Means a
structure manufactured in a factory after June
15, 1976, which is delivered to a homesite in
more than one section and placed on a perma-
nent foundation. The dimensions of the com-
pleted house shall not be less than twenty feet
by forty feet, the roof must be sloping, the sid-
ing and roofing must be the same as those on
site-built houses, and the house must be eligible
for thirty year real estate mortgage financing.
For flood plain management purposes, the term
“manufactured home” also includes park trail-
ers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles
placed on a site for greater than one hundred
eighty consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park  A  p a r c e l  ( o r
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or
more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.
Medical Marijuana Those portions of the
plant of the genus cannabis administered and
used by a registered qualifying patient, as that
term is defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801, solely for
the purpose of treating or alleviating the
patient’s debilitating medical condition or
symptoms associated with that debilitating
medical condition.
Medical Marijuana Designated Care-
giver Cultivation The cultivation of marijuana
by a registered designated caregiver for a reg-
istered qualifying patient, as defined in A.R.S.
§ 36-2801.
Medical Marijuana Dispensary A not-for-
profit facility that, pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-
2804, is registered with and certified by the
Arizona Department of Health Services to
acquire, possess, cultivate, manufacture
(including medical marijuana infusion) or
deliver, transfer, transport, supply, sell or dis-
pense medical marijuana or related supplies
and educational materials to cardholders, as
that term is defined in A.R.S § 36-2801.
Medical Marijuana Dispensary Cultiva-
tion Location  An enclosed, locked facility,
whether on site or off site, used for the cultiva-
tion of medical marijuana for a registered med-
ical marijuana dispensary and medical
marijuana infusion using the product of such
cultivation.
Medical Marijuana Infusion  The process
by which medical marijuana is incorporated
into consumable or edible goods by means of
blending, cooking, processing or other means
of incorporation.
Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient
Cultivation The cultivation of marijuana by a
registered qualifying patient, as defined in
A.R.S. § 36-2801.
===PAGE 28===
2.04
11 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
Monopole Has the same meaning as set
forth in A.R.S. § 9-591.
Motel Shall mean hotel as defined herein.
Nonchartered Financial Institution   Any
business, including accessory uses, other than
a state or federally chartered bank, credit union,
mortgage lender or savings and loan associa-
tion, that offers check cashing services, vehicle
title loans, and loans for payment of a percent-
age or graduated fee. Specifically included are
check cashing and payday loan businesses that
charge a percentage or graduated fee for cash-
ing a check or negotiable instrument and which
make loans upon assignment of wages
received, or businesses that function as
deferred presentment services. Exception:
Automobile dealers shall not be considered as
nonchartered financial institutions.
Nonconforming Use A lawful use of land
that does not comply w ith the use regulations
for its zoning district but which complied with
applicable regulations at the time the use was
established.
Nursery and Day Care School  See Child
Care Center.
Office A place where a particular kind of
business is transacted or a service is supplied,
excluding retailing, according to the following:
a. A place in which functions, such as con-
sulting, record keeping,  or clerical work are
performed.
b. A place in which a professional person
(e.g. a physician or lawyer) conducts profes-
sional services.
Off-Street Parking Space  A storage area
for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to
an access aisle, and which is not located on a
dedicated street right-of-way.
On-Street Parking Space  A temporary
storage area for a motor vehicle which is
located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
Off-Track Betting  Establishment  Any
establishment, business or organization that
accepts wagers, bets, monies or other consider-
ation for a game, race, track (i.e., horse, car, or
otherwise) or other recreational activity.
Open Space Any parcel or area of land or
water essentially unimproved and set aside,
dedicated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of
owners and occupants of land adjoining or
neighboring such open spaces.
Open Space For purposes of Section 31.24,
means a public park, pu blic sidewalk, public
walkway or public pedestrian thoroughfare.
Open Space, Common  Land within or
related to a developm ent, not individually
owned or dedicated for public use, which is
designed and intended for the common use or
enjoyment of the residents of the development
and may include such complementary struc-
tures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate. Such spa ce does not include pri-
vate or public street rights-of-way.
Open Space, Private Common open space
held in private ownership, the use of which is
normally limited to the occupants of a single
dwelling or building.
Open Space, Public Open space owned by
a public agency and maintained by it for the use
and enjoyment of the general public.
Overlay District A supplementary zoning
classification, in combination with the base dis-
trict designation, that provides additional regu-
latory, guideline and/or  incentive criteria for
consideration of development approval.
Palm Readers, Palmistry, Fortune Teller
Any individual, establishment or business that
professes to foretell future events or engages in
astrology, clairvoyance or other means of pre-
dicting the future of customers or patrons for a
fee or gratuity. This definition shall also
===PAGE 29===
2.04
12 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
include, but is not limited to, phrenology, inter-
preting of hand reading, fortune telling by a
crystal gazing, mind reading or any other type
of fortune telling. Exception: It shall not
include opinions in newspaper articles or com-
mentaries.
Parking Access The area of a parking lot
that allows motor vehi cles ingress and egress
from the street.
Parking Area  Any public or private land
area designed and used for parking motor vehi-
cles including parking lots, garages, private
driveways and legally designated areas of pub-
lic streets.
Parking Space A space for the parking of a
motor vehicle within a public or private park-
ing area.
Pathway Lineal open space, surfaced and
maintained to city specifications, that is
designed and intended to provide a connection
for pedestrian, bicycle and electric cart circula-
tion purposes or recreation of transport.
Paved Ground covered with stone, brick,
concrete, asphalt, gravel, decomposed granite,
or other surface approved by the design review
board that makes a firm, smooth and level sur-
face.
Pawn Shops, Brokers  Any establishment
or business which loans money and receives as
security for such loans pawns, or pledges of
personal or real property; or such establishment
or business that purchases personal or real
property with the intent to resell, trade or
exchange such articles at a price agreed upon at
or before the time of such sale or purchase.
Person with a Disability A person who: (a)
has a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such per-
son’s major life activities; (b) has a record of
having such an impairment; or (c) is regarded
as having such an impa irment. “Person with a
disability” does not include current users of
illegal controlled subs tances or other sub-
stances to which they are addicted, persons
convicted for illegal manufacture or distribu-
tion of a controlled substance, sex offenders,
and juvenile offenders.
Plan, Development  A preliminary map
indicating tentative layout of streets and loca-
tion of schools, recreation areas, and other
community facilities for the entirety of a land-
holding of which a portion is to be submitted as
a preliminary plat; a map meeting the needs of
this code.
Plat A map of a subdivision.
Plat, Final A map of all or part of a subdi-
vision essentially conforming to an approved
preliminary plat prepared in accordance with
this code.
Plat, Preliminary  A preliminary map
including supporting da ta indicating a pro-
posed subdivision design prepared in accor-
dance with this code.
Primary Condominium Unit  The largest
separate portion of a residential condominium
unit intended for separ ate occupancy by the
owner or as a resort rental unit.
Principal Use  The main use to which the
premises are devoted and the primary purpose
for which the premises exist.
Process and Processing  For purposes of
Section 31.24, means to harvest, dry, cure, trim
or separate parts of the marijuana plant.
Public Place  Has the same meaning pre-
scribed in the Smoke-Free-Arizona Act,
A.R.S. § 36.601.01.
Recreational Marijuana
a. Means all parts of the plant of the genus
cannabis, whether growing or not, as well as
the seeds from the plant, the resin extracted
from any part of the plant, and every com-
===PAGE 30===
2.04
12-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
pound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture
or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin.
b. Includes cannabis as defined in A.R.S.
§ 13-3401.
c. Does not include industrial hemp, the
fiber produced from the stalks of the plant of
the genus cannabis, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, sterilized seeds of the plant
that are incapable of germination, or the weight
of any other ingredient combined with mari-
juana to prepare topical or oral administrations,
food, drink or other products.
Recreational Marijuana Concentrate
a. Means resin extracted from any part of
a plant of the genus cannabis and every com-
pound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture
or preparation of that resin or tetrahydrocan-
nabinol.
b. Does not include indu strial hemp or the
weight of any other ingredient combined with
cannabis to prepare topical or oral administra-
tions, food, drink or other products.
Recreational Marijuana Establishment
An entity licensed by the department to operate
all of the following:
a. A single retail location at which the
licensee may sell recreational marijuana and
recreational marijuana products to consumers,
cultivate recreational marijuana and manufac-
ture recreational marijuana products.
b. A single off-site cultivation location at
which the licensee may cultivate recreational
marijuana, process recreational marijuana and
manufacture recreational marijuana products,
but from which recreational marijuana and rec-
reational marijuana products may not be trans-
ferred or sold to consumers.
c. A single off-site location at which the
licensee may manufacture recreational mari-
juana products and package and store recre-
ational marijuana and recreational marijuana
products, but from which recreational mari-
juana and recreational marijuana products may
not be transferred or sold to consumers.
Recreational Marijuana Products  Recre-
ational marijuana concentrate and products
that are composed of recreational marijuana
and other ingredients and that are intended for
use or consumption, including edible products,
ointments, and tinctures.
Recreational Marijuana Testing Facility
The Department or another entity that is
licensed by the Depart ment to analyze the
potency of marijuana and test marijuana for
harmful contaminants.
Recreational Vehicle A vehicular type unit
(motor home, camper, boat, motorcycle, travel
trailer and the like) primarily designed for rec-
reational, temporary or travel use.
Repair To put back in good condition after
damage or decay.
Residential Condominium Project A con-
dominium project for residential uses.
Residential Condominium Unit A condo-
minium unit in a residential condominium proj-
ect occupied by one family.
Resort Rental Unit  A primary condo-
minium unit or a split-off unit used in the room
inventory of a resort for nightly rentals in
accordance with Sections 16.06, 17.06 or
18.06.
Restaurant An establishment where meals
are prepared and served to the public for con-
sumption on the premises entirely.
Restaurant, Drive-In  An establishment
where meals may or may not be consumed on
the premises.
Retail Services  Establishments providing
services or entertainment, as opposed to prod-
ucts, to the general public, including eating and
drinking places, hotels and motels, finance, real
estate and insurance, personal services, motion
===PAGE 31===
2.04
12-1a (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 27, 4-24)
pictures, amusement and recreation services,
health, educational and social services, muse-
ums and galleries.
Retention Basin A pond, pool or basin used
for the permanent storage of water runoff.
Right-of-Way (ROW)  Land which by
deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedi-
cation, usage, or process of law is reserved for
or dedicated to the general public for street,
highway, alley, public utility, pedestrian, walk-
way, bikeway, pathway, or drainage purposes.
School An institution licensed by the Ari-
zona Department of Education.
Service Station  See Automobile Service
Station.
Setback The minimum allowable horizontal
distance from a given point or line of reference
to the vertical wall or other element of a prin-
cipal building or structure as defined herein.
The point or line of reference will be the lot
line.
Sidewalk A surfaced pedestrian way main-
tained on public right-of-way or private prop-
erty.
Single Housekeeping Unit  The functional
equivalent of a traditional family, whose mem-
bers are an interactive group of persons jointly
occupying a residential unit, including the joint
use of and responsibil ity for common areas,
and sharing household activities and responsi-
bilities such as meals, chores, household main-
tenance, and expenses, and where, if the
residents are renters, all adult residents have
chosen to jointly occupy the entire premises of
the dwelling unit under a single written lease
with joint use and responsibility for the prem-
ises, and the makeup of the household occupy-
ing the unit is determined by the residents of the
unit rather than the land lord or property man-
ager.
Site Plan The development plan for one or
more lots on which is shown the existing and
proposed conditions of the lot including:
topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains,
marshes and waterways, open spaces, walk-
ways, means of ingress and egress, utility ser-
vices, landscaping, structures and signs,
lighting and screening devices and any other
information that reasonably may be required in
order that an informed decision can be made by
the approving authority.
Slope The degree of deviation of a surface
from the horizontal, usually expressed in per-
cent or degrees, or as a ratio.
Small Wireless Facility  Has the same
meaning as set forth in A.R.S. § 9-591.
Smoke For purposes of Section 31.24 means
to inhale, exhale, burn, carry or possess any
lighted recreational marijuana or lighted recre-
ational marijuana products, whether natural or
synthetic.
Solar Energy Collector Panel  A panel
designed to absorb sunlight and convert energy
for generating electricity or heating fluids/con-
ductors.
Split-Off Unit A single room portion of a
residential condominium unit that has separate
bathroom facilities, a separate living area, and
a separate entrance from the primary condo-
minium unit.
Square Footage, Net  The net square foot-
age is determined by subtracting from the total
square footage of the parcel that area deemed
necessary for street dedication and that area 
===PAGE 32===
2.04
12-2 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
used for private str eets and common drive-
ways, if any.
Street Any existing or proposed street, ave-
nue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place,
bridge, viaduct, or easement for public vehicu-
lar access, or a street shown in a plat heretofore
approved pursuant to law, or a street in a plat
duly filed and recorded in the Maricopa County
recorder’s office. A st reet includes all land
within the street right-of-way, whether
improved or unimprov ed, and includes such
improvements as pavement, shoulders, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, parking spaces, bridges and
viaducts.
Street, Arterial  A street whose primary
function is to carry traffic between and through
major traffic generators.
Street, Collector  A street whose primary
function is to carry traffic from local streets to
arterial streets and whose secondary function is
to provide access to abutting properties.
Street, Cul-de-sac A short local street with
a maximum length of four hundred feet having
one end permanently terminated in and includ-
ing a vehicular turning area.
Street, Frontage A local street parallel and
adjacent to an arterial street which provides
access to abutting property, intercepts other
local streets and controls access to the arterial
street.
Street, Local A street serving the primary
function of providing access to abutting prop-
erty.
Structure Anything constructed or erected,
the use of which requires a fixed location on
the ground, including a tent.
Structured Sober Living Home  Any
premises, place or building that provides alco-
hol-free or drug-free housing, promotes inde-
pendent living and life  skill development and
provides structured activities that are directed
primarily toward recovery from substance use
disorders in a supervised setting to a group of
unrelated individuals who are recovering from
drug or alcohol addiction and who are receiv-
ing outpatient behavioral health services for
substance abuse or addiction treatment while
living in the home. A “structured sober living
home” does not include a family group home or
a private residence in which a related family
member is required to receive outpatient
behavioral health services for substance abuse
or addiction treatment as a condition of con-
tinuing to reside in the family dwelling.
Subdivision Improved or unimproved land
or lands divided for the purpose of financing,
sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into
four or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or, if
a new street is involved, any such property
which is divided into two or more lots, tracts or
parcels of land, or any such property, the
boundaries of which have been fixed by a
recorded plat, which is divided into more than
two parts. Subdivision also includes any con-
dominium, cooperativ e, community apart-
ment, townhouse or similar project containing
four or more parcels, in which an undivided
interest in the land is coupled with the right of
exclusive occupancy of any unit located
thereon, but plats of such projects need not
show the buildings or the manner in which the
building or airspace above the property shown
on the plat are to be divided.
Note: Subdivision does not include the fol-
lowing:
1. The sale or exchange of parcels of land
to or between adjoining property owners if
such sale or exchange does not create addi-
tional lots.
===PAGE 33===
2.04
12-3 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
2. The partitioning of land in accordance
with other statutes regulating the partitioning
of land held in common ownership.
3. The leasing of apartments, offices,
stores or similar space within a building or
trailer park, nor to mineral, oil or gas leases.
===PAGE 34===
2.04
13 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 27, 4-24)
Substantial Improvement  Any repair,
reconstruction or improvement of a structure,
the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty per-
cent of the market value of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a struc-
ture to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions.
b. Any alteration of a structure listed on
the National Register of Historical Places or a
State Inventory of Historical Places.
Support Structure The structure to which
antennas and other hardware is mounted for the
purposes of a wireless  communications facil-
ity.
Tattoo Establishment, Body Piercing
Establishment A business, establishment,
club, or other organization that marks the skin
with any indelible design, letter, scroll, symbol,
figure or other mark placed with the aid of nee-
dles or other instruments upon or under the skin
that will leave color or objects permanently and
that cannot be removed, repaired or recon-
structed except through a surgical procedure
(also includes body piercing, modification
establishments).
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy
(TCO) A document that may be issued by the
building official to temporarily allow the occu-
pancy or use of a building subject to specific,
itemized conditions.
Tent A fabric shade canopy at a fixed loca-
tion.
Tract An area, parcel, site or piece of land
and property.
Unlisted Uses Uses are listed in Section 28,
Zoning Matrix/District Requirements Sum-
mary. If a proposed use is not listed in Section
28, the zoning administrator shall determine if
the proposed use is subs tantially similar to a
permitted use; in that event, the zoning admin-
istrator shall assign the proposed use to a per-
mitted use definition.
Use The purpose or activity for which land
or buildings are designed, arranged, or
intended, or for which land or buildings are
occupied or maintained.
Use Permit  Approval by the council of a
conditional use, with or without specific stipu-
lations pertinent to development of the
requested use or its manner of operation, in a
district listing the use as one which may be
conducted therein subject to obtaining a use
permit.
Use, Temporary  A use established for a
fixed period of time with the intent to discon-
tinue such use upon the expiration of the time
period.
Utility Poles and Wires  Poles, structures,
wires, cable, conduit, transformers and related
facilities used in or as a part of the transporta-
tion or distribution of electricity or power or in
the transmission of telephone, telegraph, radio
or television communications, but the term
“utility poles and wires” shall not include wire-
less communication facilities.
Variance Written permission by the board
of adjustment to differ from the zoning regula-
tions.
Wall A screening structure or barrier con-
structed primarily of masonry.
Wall or Fence, Full View A wall or fence,
constructed so that at least seventy-five percent
of the top four feet of its height is open and
unobstructed when viewed on a horizontal
plane, from any point perpendicular to the
fence line. A wall or fe nce is considered to be
open and unobstructed even though metal rods,
===PAGE 35===
2.04
13-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 27, 4-24)
metal balusters, or fence posts are utilized
within the top four feet so long as seventy-five
percent of such area remains open. 
Wall or Fence, Partial View  A wall or
fence, constructed so that at least seventy-five 
percent of the top two feet of its height is open
and unobstructed when viewed on a horizontal
plane, from any point perpendicular to the
fence line. A wall or fenc e is considered to be
open or unobstructed even though metal rods,
metal balusters, or fence posts are utilized
within the top two feet so long as seventy-five
percent of such area remains open.
Wholesale The bulk sale of goods generally
for resale to a person other than the direct con-
sumer.
Winery/Distillery A place where wine or
liquor is manufactured.
Wireless Communications Facility  An
unstaffed facility for the transmission and
reception of personal wireless services radio or
microwave signals. Personal wireless services
includes commercial mobile services, common
carrier wireless exchange access services, and
unlicensed wireless services, but not direct-to-
home satellite services.  Wireless communica-
tions facilities are composed of two or more of
the following components:
a. Antennas;
b. Support structure;
c. Equipment cabinet or building;
d. Security fencing.
Wireless Facility Has the same meaning as
set forth in A.R.S. § 9-591 and includes a
monopole.
Yard, Front  An area extending the full
width across the front of a lot, measured from
the front property line inward to the front build-
ing setback line on the lot.
Yard, Rear  An area extending the full
width across the back of a lot, measured from
the rear property line inward to the rear build-
ing setback line on the lot.
Yard, Side A yard measured from the side
property line of the lot inward to the side build-
ing setback line and ly ing between the front
yard and the rear yard, or in absence of either a
front or rear yard, the front or rear lot setback
lines respectively. 
Yard Sale Also called garage sale or mov-
ing sale. The occasional sale of surplus per-
sonal property held on premises by the owner
or occupant of a lot in a residential district.
(Ord. 24-279 § 1; Ord. 21-248 § 1; Ord. 18-227
§ 1 (part); Ord. 18-223 § 1 (part); Ord. 16-211
§ 1 (part); Ord. 15-203 § 1 (part); Ord. 14-197
§ 1 (part); Ord. 11-168 § 1 (part); Ord. 11-167
§ 1 (part); Ord. 11-166 § 1 (part); Ord. 11-163
§ 1; Ord. 07-134 § 1 (part); Ord. 07-132 § 1
(part); Ord. 07-128 § 1 (part); Ord. 06-111 § 1
(part); Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part); Ord. 00-61 § 1
(part); Ord. 97-44 § 1 (part); Ord. 97-42 § 1
(part))
===PAGE 36===
3.01
14 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 16, 2-15)
SECTION 3
ADMINISTRATION
Subsections:
3.01 Planning and Zoning 
Commission
3.02 Board of Adjustment
3.03 Zoning Administrator
3.04 Design Review Board
3.05 Appeals of Required Dedications 
and Exactions and of Zoning 
Regulations Pursuant to A.R.S. 
§§ 9-500.12 and 9-500.13
3.06 Reconsideration of Certain City 
Council Decisions
3.07 Changes in Land Use Laws
3.01 Planning and Zoning Commission
a. Purpose
The planning and zoning commission is cre-
ated to provide analysis and recommendation
of the city’s general plan, proposed develop-
ment, rezoning and ordinance amendments to
the council. Its purpose is to review all aspects
of a proposed and future development includ-
ing, but not limited to, present and projected
growth of the city, site planning and the rela-
tionship of the development to the surrounding
environment and the community. The commis-
sion recognizes the interdependence of land
values, aesthetics and good site planning by
promoting harmonious, safe, attractive and
compatible development, that is therefore con-
sidered to be in the best interest of health, safety
and general welfare.
b. Organization
The commission shall consist of seven mem-
bers. All members shall be residents of the city
of Litchfield Park, and shall be appointed by
the council. The word  “commission,” when
used in the code shall mean the planning and
zoning commission. Members of the commis-
sion shall serve a term of three years and may
be reappointed by the council to successive
three-year terms. Any vacancy shall be filled
by the council for the unexpired term. The
members of the commission shall serve with-
out compensation but may be reimbursed if
said expenses are approved prior to incurral.
c. Officers
Officers are limited to two consecutive
terms in the same capacity.
1. Chairman
The election of a chairman will be held at
the first meeting after the new commissioners,
appointed in March, have been sworn in.
2. Vice-Chairman
The election of a vice-chairman will be held
at the first meeting after the new commissioners,
appointed in March, have been sworn in.
3. Secretary
The commission shall designate one of its
members or the appropriate municipal author-
ity shall designate one of its employees of the
city who is familiar with planning and zoning
matters to act as secretary of the commission.
It shall be the duty of  the secretary to conduct
all official correspondence of the commission,
send out all notices required by law, code or
these rules of procedure; to perform all the cus-
tomary duties of the office; to be the custodian
of the records of the commission; to supervise
the clerical work and technical preparations
necessary to the disposition of business before
the commission; and to perform all other duties
required by law, code or these rules of the com-
mission.
4. Legal Counsel
The city attorney, or his designated repre-
sentative, shall be the legal counsel for the
commission. Advice of counsel shall be
received and entered in the minutes before dis-
===PAGE 37===
pos1t1on of any question of law or matter 
requiring legal interpretation or advice. 
d. Meetings 
1. Regular Meetings 
The commission meeting dates and time are to 
be set at the same time as the election of the 
chairman and vice-chairman. 
2. Special Meetings 
Special meetings for good cause may be 
held by the commission on call of its chair­
man or a quorum of members, which call shall 
be filed with the secretary, or as may be 
scheduled by a majority of the members at any 
previous meeting. The manner of the call shall 
be specified in the minutes of the special 
meeting, and at least 48 hours notice of the 
meeting shall be given to each member. 
3. Public Meetings 
All meetings and hearings of the commis­
sion, except executive sessions, shall be open 
to the public. Any action calling for a formal 
vote shall take place only at a public meeting. 
The minutes of its proceedings, showing the 
vote of each member and records of its exami­
nations and other official actions shall be kept 
and filed in the office of the planning depart­
ment as a public record. 
A quorum necessary for the transaction of 
business shall consist of a majority of the 
members of the commission. The business of 
the commission shall be transacted by the 
majority vote of members present. Robert's 
Rules of Order shall be used in conducting 
meetings. 
4. Order of Business 
The order of business and agenda shall be 
set by the chairman and notified to the public 
at least twenty four hours prior to the meeting. 
It shall include the following if pertinent: 
15 
3.01 
A. Roll Call - Roll is called by the secre­
tary. A quorum must be present to transact 
business. 
B. Pledge of Allegiance. 
C. Reading and approval of minutes of 
previous meeting - the minutes are read by the 
secretary and approved by the commission 
members. 
D. Communications from council and call 
to the community. 
E. Business. 
F. Adjournment. 
e. Duties and Responsibilities 
The commission shall be charged with the 
following duties and responsibilities: 
1. Preparation and/or review of all present, 
future, and proposed planning, zoning, and 
subdivision codes for the city and amendments 
thereto; 
2. The holding of public hearings on such 
proposed planning, subdivision, and building 
ordinances, and amendments thereto, and the 
making of recommendations to the council for 
action; 
3. The holding of public hearings when 
necessary and the making of recommendations 
to the council on matters concerning or relat­
ing to the creation of zoning districts, the 
boundaries thereof, the appropriate regulations 
to be enforced therein, the amendments of this 
code, the granting of use permits, and any 
other matter within the scope of zoning pow­
ers; and 
4. Reviewing, conducting public hearings 
as may be required, and making recommenda­
tions to the council, the board of adjustment, 
the design review board, or the zoning admin­
istrator, whichever is applicable, for action on 
all requests for plans of development, subdivi­
sions, zoning clearances referred by the zoning 
administrator, and the interpretation of the 
===PAGE 38===
3.02
16 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 16, 2-15)
city’s planning, subdivision, and building ordi-
nances.
5. Approve or deny requests for the grant-
ing of use permits required and stipulated by
this code.
6. Hear requests for planned develop-
ments and subdivisions and in connection with
said requests recommend approval, denial, or
approval with revisions upon such requests to
the council, as requested by the council or zon-
ing administrator.
f. Official Records
1. Definition
The official records shall include these rules
and regulations, and the minutes of the com-
mission together with all findings, decisions
and other official actions.
2. Recording of Vote
The minutes shall show the vote of each
member on every question on which the com-
mission is required to act, or if absent, or if fail-
ing to vote, and shall indicate that fact.
3. Files - Retention
All applications and other matters coming
before the commission shall be filed in city hall
in accordance with the general file system.
Original papers of all applications shall be
retained for not less than three years after date
of application. The secretary shall keep a per-
manent file of all plat s, maps, charts, reports,
resolutions, notices, corr espondence, or other
matter filed with or issued by the commission.
4. Public Record
All of the records of the commission shall
be public records and sh all be open to public
inspection during customary working hours.
The commission shall arrange with the council
to provide for the safekeeping of the records of
the commission. (Ord. 14-198 § 1 (part); Ord.
05-100 § 1 (part); Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part); Ord.
99-53 § 1; Ord. 96-37 § 1 (part); Ord. 96-33 §
1 (part))
3.02 Board of Adjustment
a. Purpose
The board of adjustment is an administrative
body with responsibility for determining when
exceptional or extraord inary conditions exist
that will cause an unnecessary hardship not cre-
ated by the applicant or  property owner. The
board shall also hear appeals from administra-
tive decisions based on this code.
b. Organization
The board shall consist of five members.
The membership shall be composed of the
members of the design review board as set forth
in Section 3.04(b). The board shall select a
chairman and vice-chairman at the first meet-
ing after March 1st of each year.
c. Meetings
All meetings of the board shall be held at the
call of the chairman and at such other times as
the board of adjustment may determine. All
meetings of the board shall be open to the pub-
lic.
d. Rules
The board shall make and publish rules and
regulations to govern its proceedings.
e. Records
The board shall keep minutes of its proceed-
ings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact and shall keep records of
its examinations and other official actions, all
of which shall be of public record and be filed
in the office of the city clerk.
f. Powers and Duties of the Board
The board shall hear all applications for vari-
ances from the provisions of the code. The
board shall determine when exceptional or
extraordinary circumstances exist that will
cause an unnecessary hardship not created by
the applicant or property owner. The board
===PAGE 39===
shall also hear appeals from administrative 
decisions based on the code. 
g. Public Hearing and Notice 
1. Public Hearing 
Upon receipt in proper form of an applica­
tion for a variance, the board shall proceed to 
hold a public hearing on the application fol­
lowing the posting of a public notice as pre­
scribed below. 
2. Notice 
Notice of the public hearing shall be given 
in the following manner: 
A. Notice of the time, date and place of 
the hearing including a general explanation of 
the matter to be considered and including a 
general description of the area affected shall 
be given at least fifteen days before each 
hearing. The notice shall state that anyone 
wanting to protest may appear in person or by 
writing. Each notice of public hearing shall be 
published at least once in a newspaper of 
general circulation, circulated in the city of 
Litchfield Park, and posted at city hall, the 
public library, and at other locations in the 
city that the city clerk may deem necessary or 
advisable. 
B. Notice of the time, date, and place of 
the hearing on the variance shall be posted on 
the affected property. 
C. Notice of the time, date, and place of 
the hearing for interpretation or variance shall 
be mailed by certified mail at least fifteen 
days in advance to the owner and applicant or 
his agent. 
D. Notice of the time, date, and place of 
hearings on variances shall be sent to all own­
ers of property within three hundred feet of 
the affected property. The failure of a property 
owner to receive notice shall not invalidate an 
action if a good faith attempt was made to 
comply with the requirements of the code for 
17 
3.02 
notice. In addition to persons who receive 
notice as required by the matter under consid­
eration, the city may provide notice to others 
if it has reason to believe that they are affect­
ed or otherwise represent an interest that may 
be affected by the proposed interpretation or 
variance. 
h. Appeals from Administrative Deci­
sions 
The board shall hear appeals from adminis­
trative decisions made by administrative 
official(s) who interpret or enforce this code. 
Appeals shall be filed within thirty days of 
such decisions in the form prescribed by the 
board, except appeals shall be filed within a 
shorter time period of specifically so provided 
in this code. The board may grant appropriate 
relief to persons aggrieved. The board shall 
determine those matters over which it has 
jurisdiction. 
I. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in 
the matter appealed from, unless the office 
from whom the appeal is taken certified to the 
board that, by reason of the fact stated in the 
certificate, the stay would in his opinion cause 
imminent peril to life or property. In such 
case, proceedings shall not be stayed, except 
by a restraining order granted by the board or 
by a court of record on application and notice 
to the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
The board shall fix a reasonable time for hear­
ing the appeal and give notice thereof to the 
parties in interest and the public. 
2. The concurring vote of the majority of 
the board shall be necessary to reverse any 
order or decision of an administrative official, 
or to pass or to affect any variations from the 
terms and conditions of this zoning code. 
i. Findings and Actions by the Board 
===PAGE 40===
3.03
18 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 16, 2-15)
1. A variance from the provision of this
code shall not be authorized unless the board
shall find upon sufficient evidence:
A. That there are special circumstances or
conditions applying to the land, building or use
referred to in the app lication which do not
apply to other properties in the district; and
B. That such special circumstances were
not created by the owner or applicant; and
C. That the authorizing of the variance is
necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of substantial property rights; and
D. That the authorizin g of the application
will not be materially detrimental to persons
residing or working in the vicinity, to adjacent
property, to the neighborhood or the public
welfare in general.
2. The board shall prescribe in connection
with any variance such conditions as it may
deem necessary in order to fully carry out the
provisions and intent of this zoning code. Such
conditions may include, among other things, a
limitation of the time for which such variance
shall be valid. Violation of any such condition
shall be a violation of this code and such viola-
tion shall render the variance null and void.
j. Review of Board Decisions
A person aggrieved by a decision of the
board or a taxpayer, officer, or department of
the municipality affected by a decision of the
board, may, at any time within thirty days after
the board has rendered its decision file a com-
plaint for special action in the superior court to
review the board decision. Filing the complaint
does not stay proceedings on the decision
sought to be reviewed, but the court may on
application, grant a stay and on final hearing
may affirm or reverse, in whole or in part, or
modify the decision reviewed. (Ord. 14-198 § 1
(part); Ord. 97-42 § 1 (part))
3.03 Zoning Administrator
a. Purpose
The purpose of the office of zoning admin-
istrator is to enforce the zoning code through
the building permit process, subdivision review
process, code enforcement, and related tech-
niques as defined, to parallel the local planning,
zoning, and land development procedures.
b. Organization
In the city of Litchfield Park, the office of
zoning administrator shall be filled by the city
manager or his designee.
c. Authority and Duties of the Zoning
Administrator
1. Shall enforce the provisions of this
code;
2. Shall carry out all administrative
actions required by the zoning code, including
the giving of notice, preparation of reports, and
receiving and processing appeals;
3. Subject to the supervision and general
and specific policy laid down by the city, shall
interpret this code to members of the public,
city departments, and to other branches of gov-
ernment;
4. Shall review and make recommenda-
tions with respect to all complete applications
for zoning to the commission at the time of
such referral;
5. Shall examine premises for which zon-
ing has been requested;
6. Shall make necessary inspections in
accordance with rules of procedure established
under Section 3.03-c-12 to secure compliance
with the provisions of this code.
7. Shall, when request ed by the council
and/or the city manager or when the interests
of the city so require, make investigations in 
===PAGE 41===
3.03
19 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 7,  6-09)
connection with any matter referred to in the
code and render written reports thereof;
8. Grant, for a period of time not to exceed
thirty days, or deny applications for temporary
use permits;
9. Shall receive applications for zoning as
required by the code;
10. Shall keep careful and comprehensive
records of applications for zoning, of inspec-
tions made, of reports rendered and of notices
or orders issued. He shall further retain on file,
copies of all papers in connection with zoning
applications for such time as may be required
by law; 
11. Shall have the authority to administra-
tively approve minor design review applica-
tions filed with the design review board. Minor
design review applications include:
A. Exterior finishes and color changes con-
sistent with the color palette adopted by the
design review board;
B. Rear patio additions not visible from
public areas or streets and not exceeding five
hundred square feet of covered area;
C. Landscaping changes to design review
board-approved landscape plans, but utilizing
the same quantity and size of landscape mate-
rials;
D. Site plan revisions to design review
board-approved site plans involving not more
than five percent of the site area;
E. Yard walls on interior residential lots
that have little or no exposure to public areas;
F. Other applications that the board deter-
mines are minor;
Administrative design review approvals
shall not result in a reduction of any develop-
ment standard and shall not significantly alter
the design character established by the design
review board;
12. Shall have the authority to approve,
deny, or approve with conditions minor design
review applications; and
13. May adopt rules and procedures consis-
tent with the code for the implementation
thereof.
d. Referral to Planning and Zoning
Commission
The zoning administrator may and, in the
case of any application for zoning clearance
other than one pertaining solely to a single-
family dwelling, shall refer complete applica-
tions for zoning to the commission for its
review and recommendation. Such referral
shall be accompanied by the recommendation
of the zoning administrator, and shall be made
within fifteen days after receipt by the zoning
administrator of a complete application. The
commission shall review such application and
shall deliver its own recommendation thereon
to the zoning administrator within forty-five
days of the referral of the application to the
commission by the zoning administrator. The
zoning administrator shall render a decision
with respect to the application within ten days
after receipt of the commission’s recommenda-
tion, but in no event later than seventy days
after receipt of the complete application.
e. Time Limits
The zoning administrator shall act upon any
application or other matter brought before him
for decision within forty-five days of the date
of filing or within such longer period of time as
may be agreed to by the zoning administrator
and applicant. If no decision has been made at
the expiration of such time limit, the applica-
tion shall be deemed to have been approved and
further administrative review of said applica-
tion shall be suspended. (Ord. 07-133 § 1
(part); Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
===PAGE 42===
3.04
20 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
3.04 Design Review Board
a. Purposes
The general purposes of design review are to
protect public health, safety, and general wel-
fare, and to preserve and enhance property val-
ues by promoting and maintaining a functional
and aesthetic community  character based on
sound site planning, urban design, architecture,
landscape design, and energy efficiency, con-
sistent with the general plan, zoning code and
design guidelines of the city. Design review
will enhance the city’s distinctive character and
attractiveness as a resort center and enrich the
lives of all the resident s of Litchfield Park by
promoting harmonious, safe, attractive, and
compatible development in furtherance of pub-
lic health, safety, and general welfare.
More specifically, design review is intended
to ensure that:
1. Adopted design guidelines are applied
consistently to developments subject to design
review approval in the city;
2. Siting and architectural design of struc-
tures harmonizes visua lly with neighboring
development and creates a built environment
that is safe and aesthetically pleasing;
3. The arrangement of buildings, parking
areas, drive aisles, storm water retention areas,
pedestrian ways and other features of the site
combine to create a functional project consis-
tent with the city’s development objectives and
that is convenient for users of the property;
4. Unsightly uses, features or activities are
screened from public view and from adjacent
property, and dissimilar uses are separated by
buffers to prevent conf licts, promote privacy,
and maintain property values;
5. Landscaping provides a visually pleas-
ing setting for structures on the site, comple-
ments the architecture of the project, blends
harmoniously with the surrounding landscape,
contributes to the streetscape, conserves water,
does not conflict with public or private utili-
ties, and is suited to the site and the area’s cli-
matic conditions;
6. Project materials and colors are appro-
priate to the architectural style of the struc-
tures, suited to the desert climate, complement
neighboring properties and project a high qual-
ity image; and
7. Signage, building graphics, exterior
lighting, and other decorative structures and
features are compatible with the design of the
structure(s) and with the architectural charac-
ter of the surrounding area.
b. Applicability
1. Design review approval is required
prior to issuance of a building or sign permit
for any new:
A. Commercial and residential construc-
tion.
B. Walls, fences and other screening
devices.
C. Signs.
D. Commercial and subdivision common-
area landscaping.
E. Solar energy collector panel installa-
tions.
2. Design review approval is required for
any substantial alteration of walls, fences and
other screening devices, signs, commercial and
subdivision common ar ea landscaping, and
any alteration of or modification to the exterior
of commercial and residential construction.
c. Organization
1. There is hereby created a design review
board consisting of a council member, a plan-
ning and zoning commission member, and
three public members wh o shall be appointed
by the council; two of whom shall be archi-
tects, landscape architects or persons other-
wise qualified by design background training
or experience; and one of whom shall represent
===PAGE 43===
3.04
21 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
the general public. Pu blic members shall be
appointed to serve two-year terms; members of
the council and the commission shall serve
one-year terms.
2. Meetings of the design review board
shall be open to the public and shall be at the
call of the chairman, or at such other time as
the rules of the design review board may deter-
mine. The design review board shall select a
chairman and vice chairman at the first meet-
ing after the new board members, appointed in
September, have been sworn in. Minutes of the
design review board’s proceedings, showing
the vote of each member and other official
actions, shall be kept in the office of the city
clerk as a public record.
3. The design review board may adopt by-
laws and rules as it deems necessary (subject to
council approval) for the time and place of its
meetings and such other matters relative to its
work and administration of its duties which are
not otherwise provided for by statute, ordi-
nance or resolution.
d. Powers, Duties, Jurisdiction
1. The design review board shall review
applications for design review and may
approve, conditionally approve or deny such
applications.
2. The board’s action shall be based solely
on the design guidelines and site design regu-
lations set forth in Section 39; landscaping reg-
ulations set forth in Section 30; Section 31.22,
Solar Energy Collector Panels; sign regula-
tions set forth in Section 35; and the site plan
regulations set forth in Section 37. The design
review board may consider any action taken or
recommendation of a homeowner’s or prop-
erty owner’s association with respect to the
design of the structure. 
3. For nonresidential and mixed-use
planned developments, the board may approve
a design package that deviates from the design
guidelines set forth in Section 39, landscaping
regulations set forth in Section 30, solar energy
collector panel installation regulations set forth
in Section 31.22, the sign regulations set forth
in Section 35, and the site plan regulations set
forth in Section 37, if it determines that the
proposed design meets the goals set forth in
those sections. The board shall require, as a
condition of approval for nonresidential uses
or mixed-use planned developments, a docu-
ment establishing design guidelines in text and
graphic illustrations as a reference for subse-
quent improvements, construction or recon-
struction on the subject site.
4. The design review board may impose
such reasonable conditions as it may deem
necessary in order to fully carry out the provi-
sions and intent of this section. Violations of
any such condition shall be a violation of this
section and such violations shall render any
permit null and void.
5. The board shall not hear applications
for design review for properties that do not
comply with applicable zoning or subdivision
plat approval unless the application is being
processed concurrently with such zoning or
subdivision plat approval.
e. Administration
1. Application
Applications shall be made by the owner of
the property or his authorized agent. If the
applicant is not the pr operty owner, a letter
from the property owner authorizing the agent
to act in his behalf shall accompany said appli-
cation.
A. City staff shall prescribe the form and
content of applications and necessary accom-
panying data. The applic ation shall be filed
with the city manager or his designee and be
accompanied by payment of the applicable
review fee, no part of which is returnable.
===PAGE 44===
3.04
22 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
B. An application sha ll be accompanied by
a fee as authorized in Section 5; and set forth
on the fee schedule kept on file in city hall.
2. Findings
A. The design review board may deny an
application if it finds that any requirements of
this section, the general plan, or the develop-
ment policies and standards of the city of
Litchfield Park have not been complied with.
B. The design review board may approve
an application if it finds that: 
I. All provisions of the code of the city of
Litchfield Park have been complied with.
II. Where applicable, all provisions of
master plans, the general plan, and develop-
ment policies and standards of the city of
Litchfield Park have been complied with.
III. Prior to design review board approval
of specific improvements for a municipal use,
a master site plan for ultimate development of
that municipal use shall have been approved by
the city council.
3. Expiration of Approval
A. The approval of plans for development
shall become effective on  the thirty-first day
after approval if no appeal is filed and shall
expire and become null and void one year from
the date of approval if a building permit has not
been issued, unless a different time period is
made a condition of design review board
approval. This requirement shall not apply to
planned development site plans for municipal
uses.
B. A one-time extension of approval for up
to one year may be granted if the applicant files
for the extension prior to the approval becom-
ing void and the design review board finds that
the reasons justify extension of approval.
4. Enforcement
A. Prior to the issuance of a building per-
mit for any project subjected to design review,
the building inspector shall ascertain that the
permit application complies with the plans
approved by the design review board and that
the time limitations imposed by this section or
the design review board have not elapsed. The
design review board requirements shall be
incorporated and shall become conditions of
the issued building permit.
B. The building inspector of the city shall
insure that all matters approved by the design
review board are undertaken and completed
according to the approval of the design review
board and is hereby authorized and required to
cause to be stopped any work attempted to be
done without or contrary to the approval of the
design review board and shall cause any viola-
tor to be prosecuted.
f. Appeal and City Council Review
1. The approval, with  or without condi-
tions, or denial by the design review board of
an application shall be final unless within
thirty days from the date of the design review
board’s decision the applicant shall appeal
therefrom in writing to the council. Such
appeal shall be in writing in care of the city
clerk, shall be accompanied by payment of an
appeal fee as authorized in Section 5 and set
forth on the fee schedule kept on file in city
hall, and shall indicate where, in opinion of the
appellant, the design review board was in
error. The city clerk shall schedule the appeal
for a council agenda, and the council shall
uphold, modify or overrule the decision of the
design review board. The decision of the coun-
cil shall be final.
2. A member of the council may appeal a
decision of the design review board and the
council shall uphold, modify or overrule said
decision. Notice of such council-initiated
review of any decision of the design review
board shall be given to the applicant by the city
clerk within thirty da ys after action upon the
application in question or the decision of the
===PAGE 45===
3.05
23 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
design review board shall be deemed to be
final and binding upon the city of Litchfield
Park.
g. Compliance
1. Any failure to comp ly with the process
and procedures of this section by any person
shall be prohibited and unlawful and such per-
son shall be deemed to be guilty of a misde-
meanor punishable upon conviction in
accordance with the general penalty provisions
of the code of the city of Litchfield Park, Ari-
zona, and further, in addition to other reme-
dies, the provisions of this section may be
enforced by means of injunctive relief.
2. Prior to any building being occupied,
there must be full compliance with all applica-
ble requirements of the design review board.
(Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part); Ord. 11-167 § 1 (part);
Ord. 07-133 § 1 (part); Ord. 07-130 § 1 (part);
Ord. 96-37 § 1 (part))
3.05 Appeals of Required Dedications and 
Exactions and of Zoning Regulations 
Pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 9-500.12 and 9-
500.13
a. Appeals
Appeals of a required dedication or exaction
filed pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-500.12 and of a
zoning regulation alleged to create a taking
pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-500.13 shall comply
with the procedures of this section and A.R.S.
§ 9-500.12(G). No fee shall be charged for the
appeal. Appeals shall only be filed by a prop-
erty owner. Appeals shall be filed on a form
established by the city within thirty days of the
date of the final action imposing the dedication
or exaction or adopting or amending the zoning
regulation. The city sh all notify the property
owner of the right to appeal pursuant to this
section and provide a description of the appeal
procedure.
b. Notice of Hearing
The property owner shall be given at least
ten days’ written notice of the time and place of
the hearing by certified mail. The property
owner may agree to a shorter time for such
notice.
c. Hearing
The hearing shall not be a public hearing.
Prior to the hearing, the city shall submit a tak-
ings report to the zoning hearing officer. The
hearing shall be held not later than thirty days
after the appeal is filed.
d. Appeals Filed Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-
500.12
An appeal of a required dedication or exac-
tion as a condition of approval for the use,
improvement or development of real property
shall comply with this subsection. No appeal of
a dedication or exaction may be filed under this
subsection if the dedi cation or exaction is
imposed by a legislative act of the city council
that does not give discretion to a city official or
city department to determine the nature or
extent of the dedication or exaction.
1. Findings
In determining whether a dedication or
exaction is in violation of the law, the city has
the burden to establish that:
A. There is an essential nexus between the
dedication or exaction and a legitimate govern-
mental interest of the city; and
B. The required dedication or exaction is
roughly proportional to the impact of the pro-
posed use.
2. Decision
If the zoning hearing o fficer finds that the
city has not met its burden as described in sub-
section (d)(1) of this section, the zoning hear-
ing officer may modify or delete the dedication
or exaction requirement. If the zoning hearing
officer finds that the city has met its burden,
===PAGE 46===
3.05
23a (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
the zoning hearing officer may affirm the ded-
ication or exaction requirement. The zoning
hearing officer shall decide the appeal within
five working days after the appeal is heard.
===PAGE 47===
3.06
23-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 4,  2-08)
e. Appeals Filed Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-
500.13
An appeal of the adoption or amendment of
a zoning regulation by the city council alleged
to create a taking shall comply with this sub-
section.
1. Findings
In determining whether an adopted or
amended zoning regulation creates a taking of
property in violation of A.R.S. § 9-500.13, the
city has the burden to establish that the zoning
regulation does not create a taking. The zoning
hearing officer shall consider whether the zon-
ing regulation would deny all economic use of
the property. In determining whether the action
would deny the owner all economic use of the
property, the zoning hearing officer shall con-
sider the following factors:
A. Uses Permitted
Evaluation of the range of uses allowed
under the general plan and this code.
B. Economic Impact Study
Any economic impact study submitted
related to the impact of the conditions of an
amendment on the property.
2. Decision
If the zoning hearing officer finds that the
city has not met its burden as described in sub-
section (e)(1) of this section, the zoning hear-
ing officer shall transmit a recommendation to
the city council and the city council may recon-
sider its prior action. If the zoning hearing
officer finds that the city has met its burden,
the zoning hearing officer may affirm the zon-
ing regulation. The zoning hearing officer shall
decide the appeal within five working days
after the appeal is heard.
f. Appeal of Decision of Zoning Hearing
Officer
A property owner aggrieved by a decision of
the zoning hearing officer to modify or affirm
a dedication or exaction requirement or to
affirm a zoning regulation may file within
thirty days after the decision a complaint in
superior court, pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-
500.12(G). (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))3.05
3.06 Reconsideration of Certain City 
Council Decisions
a. Request for Reconsideration
An applicant may request a reconsideration
of a city council decision on any of the follow-
ing grounds:
1. An alleged violation of the fair housing
act;
2. An alleged violation of the Americans
with Disabilities Act or Arizonans with Dis-
abilities Act;
3. An alleged violation of the Religious
Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act or
the Arizona Free Exercise of Religion Act; and
4. An alleged violation of the telecommu-
nications act.
b. Reconsideration Procedure
1. Time of Filing
The request for reconsideration shall be
filed within ten days of the city council deci-
sion.
2. Fact Finding Hearing
A. Prior to reconsideration by the city
council, the zoning hearing officer shall con-
duct a fact-finding hearing to gather a com-
plete record of all information pertaining to the
request.
B. The zoning hearing officer shall have
the authority to request all information neces-
sary to compile a complete record pertaining to
the request.
C. City officials and the applicant shall
fully disclose all information relevant to the
fact finding.
D. The zoning hearing officer shall prepare
a report and recommendation for city council
===PAGE 48===
3.07
23-2 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 4,  2-08)
consideration within sixty days of the filing of
the request.
3. City Council Reconsideration
A. The city council shall conduct a public
hearing on the request.
B. In its deliberation, the city council shall
consider only the applicant’s written request,
the findings of fact prepared by the zoning
hearing officer, and the zoning hearing
officer’s recommendation. No new evidence
shall be submitted.
C. The city council shall uphold, reverse,
or modify its prior decision or remand the mat-
ter to the zoning hearing officer to develop
additional findings. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
3.07 Changes in Land Use Laws
a. Applications for Change in Land Use
Laws; Waiver
1. Any property owner applying for a
change in a land use law shall include, as part
of its application, an agreement to waive
claims for diminution of value in a form pre-
scribed by the city consistent with A.R.S. § 12-
1134 and executed by all owners of the prop-
erty. Prior to and as a condition of final
approval of a change in a land use law, the city
may require execution of an updated agree-
ment by the property owner(s) of record. The
applicant shall verify property ownership by
submitting a title report. The waiver will be
recorded by the city.
2. A change in land use regulations
includes, but is not limited to, amendments to
the zoning map, general plan land use designa-
tions, a use permit, variance or annexation.
b. Claims for Diminution in Property
Value
1. Filing of Claim
Any claim for diminution in property value
pursuant to A.R.S. § 12-1134 due to a change
in a land use law shall be filed with the city
clerk. All claims for diminution in value pursu-
ant to A.R.S. § 12-1134 shall be filed on a form
prescribed by the city.
2. City Review
After a claim is filed, city staff shall review
the claim to determine whether the enactment
or application of a land use law has diminished
the value of the claimant’s property. A certi-
fied land appraiser, economist, or other quali-
fied expert may be consulted by staff to
determine the amount of the diminishment of
value, if any.
3. Staff Recommendation
The city manager shall prepare a recom-
mendation to council to deny the claim, pay
compensation for diminishment in value or
rescind or modify the land use law.
4. City Council Determination
Within ninety days of the filing of the claim,
the city council shall make a determination
whether to deny the claim or pay compensa-
tion, rescind or modify the land use law or its
application to the claimant’s property. The city
council’s determination shall be made in writ-
ing and a copy shall be provided to the claim-
ant. Any rescission or modification of the
application of a land use law to an individual
property shall be recorded in the office of the
Maricopa County recorder.
5. Satisfaction of Notice of Claims
Requirements
Filing a claim pursuant to this section shall
be deemed to satisfy the requirements set forth
in A.R.S. § 12-821.01 for filing an administra-
tive claim against the city. (Ord. 07-134 § 1
(part))
===PAGE 49===
4.01
24 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 4,  2-08)
SECTION 4
AMENDMENTS
Subsections:
4.01 Introduction
4.02 Type of Amendment
4.03 Initiation of Amendment
4.04 Application for Amendment
4.05 Citizen Review Process
4.06 Notice of Public Hearing
4.07 Public Hearing by Commission 
on Applications
4.08 Protests Against Amendments
4.09 Reconsideration of Denied Map 
Amendments
4.10 General Plan Amendments
4.01 Introduction
The council may from time to time amend,
supplement, change or repeal the regulations,
restrictions and district boundaries herein
established. All amendments to this code and
the district map shall be consistent with the
adopted general plan, as may, from time to
time, be amended, and shall be a reflection of
the city’s land use planning goals. Requests to
amend this code may be initiated by the council
or the commission on their own motions, or by
petition from property owners as in this article.
4.02 Type of Amendment
a. Text Amendment
The application for an amendment to the text
of this code shall state in particular the article,
section, subsection, and paragraph sought to be
amended. The application for amendment shall
contain the language of the proposed amend-
ment and shall recite the reason for such pro-
posed change in the text.
b. Map Amendment
An application which seeks to change or
modify the classification imposed upon a par-
ticular piece of property by the district map.
c. An application for an amendment to the
general plan land use element shall include pro-
posed revisions of land use intensity, plans for
roadways and deletions of requirements to
reserve or dedicate land for public purpose
and/or as otherwise specified in Section 4.09.
(Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
4.03 Initiation of Amendment
a. The initiation of a change to the text
and/or district map may be accomplished by a
simple majority of the property owners of
record in the area of proposed change or their
authorized agents, a majority vote of the coun-
cil, or majority vote of the commission.
b. Any property owner applying for
change in a land use law shall execute an agree-
ment to waive claims for diminution in value as
set forth in Section 3.07. (Ord. 07-134 § 1
(part))
4.04 Application for Amendment
a. Application Form for Text Amend-
ment
Application for amendment of the text of
this code shall be made to the city on a standard
form provided for this purpose. The application
shall include:
1. The applicant’s name, address, and
interest in the amendment;
2. The language of the proposed amend-
ment to the code;
3. Statements in support of the applica-
tion, including a list of the present conditions
justifying the proposed amendment; and
===PAGE 50===
4.04
25 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 4,  2-08)
4. An agreement to waive claims for dim-
inution in value as set forth in Section 3.07 of
this code.
b. Application for District Map Amend-
ment
An application for an amendment to a dis-
trict map shall include:
1. The name and address of all owners of
the property for which a change is sought,
together with proof of ownership. Proof of
ownership shall consist of a verified applica-
tion for a title policy dated not more than thirty
days prior to the date of the application by a
title company authorized to conduct business
in the state of Arizona. In the event that the
application includes other property in addition
to that owned by the applicant, there shall be
filed by the applicant on a city form provided
therefor, a petition in favor of the request
signed by the real property owners represent-
ing at least fifty-one percent of the land area to
be included in the application. Such petition
shall be filed and checked for authenticity of
ownership before the application is accepted
by the city.
In the event that the application includes
properties owned by more than one owner, the
city clerk shall notify, by first class mail, all
property owners as listed on the county asses-
sor’s records included in the area proposed to
be changed by the application. Such notice
shall be postmarked not later than fifteen days
prior to any commission public hearing on the
application.
2. Where the applicant represents another
person, firm, partnership or corporation, proof
of agency, including a listing of every real
party in interest, whether a beneficiary of a
trust or otherwise, shall be provided to the city.
A. If the land is owned by a corporation,
proof of agency shall consist of a corporate res-
olution designating the individual to act as an
agent. The corporate resolution must be certi-
fied by the secretary of the corporation and
authenticated by the corporate seal, or
acknowledged in the form prescribed by Ari-
zona Revised Statutes § 33-506.2.
B. If the land is owned by a partnership,
proof of agency shall consist of a written doc-
ument of the partner(s) designating an individ-
ual to act as agent. The document must be
certified and acknowledged in the form pre-
scribed by Arizona Revised Statutes § 33-
506.3.
C. If the land is owned by an individual,
proof of agency shall consist of a written doc-
ument designating an individual to act as
agent. The document must be certified and
acknowledged in the form prescribed by Ari-
zona Revised Statutes § 33-506.1.
3. The proposed amendment to the district
classification or boundary.
4. A map drawn to scale showing the
existing and proposed district boundaries and
an accurate legal description of the area being
proposed for the amendment. If the legal
description of the property is less than the
entirety of a lot, block or parcel described in a
recorded subdivision, then said legal descrip-
tion and map shall be prepared and certified by
a registered surveyor licensed by the state of
Arizona.
5. A vicinity ownership map drawn to
scale showing all parcels in the vicinity adja-
cent to and surrounding the property proposed
to be changed, within a radius of three hundred
feet of the exterior boundaries of the property.
6. A typed or printed list containing the
names and mailing addresses of the owners of
parcels within a radius of three hundred feet of
the boundaries as indicated in subsection (a)(5)
of this section, and identified by the same num-
===PAGE 51===
4.04
25-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 4,  2-08)
ber as on the vicinity ownership map. Correct
zip codes must be shown for each address.
7. Statements reflecting the present condi-
tions justifying the proposed amendment;
statements showing that the parcel fulfills the
criteria for establishment of the proposed dis-
trict or, in the absence of ability to comply,
statements as to why the presumption against
the rezoning should be overcome; and any
other factors or reasons in support of the pro-
posed amendments.
8. An agreement to waive claims for dim-
inution in value as set forth in Section 3.07 of
this code. (Ord. 07-134 § 1 (part); Ord. 05-100
§ 1 (part))
===PAGE 52===
4.05 Citizen Review Process 
a. Prior to a public hearing on any appli­
cation for a rezoning of property or creation of 
a specific plan or issuance of a special use 
permit, a citizen review process complying 
with this subsection shall be conducted. The 
purpose of the citizen review process is to 
provide an opportunity for citizen involve­
ment and public awareness of applications for 
rezoning of property, adoption of specific 
plans, approval of special use permits, and 
adoption of zoning code text amendments. 
b. Applications for rezoning, specific 
plans and issuance of a special use permit. 
1. The applicant, in coordination with the 
planning department, shall establish a time, 
date, and place for a citizen review session to 
provide a reasonable opportunity for the ap­
plicant, adjacent landowners, and other poten­
tially affected citizens to discuss issues or 
concerns they may have with the application 
proposed by the applicant. Planning staff shall 
attend the meeting as an observer and shall 
not conduct the meeting. The applicant shall 
supply the planning department with minutes 
of the neighborhood meeting and a list of all 
individuals in attendance. The staff member in 
attendance shall report the results of the 
neighborhood meeting and a list of all indi­
viduals in attendance. The staff member in 
attendance shall report the results of the 
neighborhood meeting to the planning and 
zoning commission and/or city council at such 
time as they take action on the rezoning or 
specific plan or special use permit application, 
if any. 
2. Written notice of the citizen review 
session shall be given at least five days prior 
to the meeting and shall include the time, date, 
and location of the citizen review meeting and 
sufficient details regarding the substance of 
the proposed rezoning or specific plan or spe-
26 
4.05 
cial use permit application so as to allow citi­
zens and other affected persons to determine 
how they might be affected by the proposed 
application. 
3. The applicant shall provide to the city 
for mailing such notice by first class mail to: 
1) each property owner within one thousand 
feet of the boundary of the property subject to 
the application; 2) all other interested parties 
who have requested that they be placed on a 
notification list maintained by the planning 
department; and 3) adjoining municipalities 
sharing borders with the property subject to 
the application. 
4. The planning director may establish 
additional procedures for the citizen review 
process as is deemed necessary to enhance 
public participation. 
c. Text amendments to the zoning code. 
1. A citizen review session shall be held 
at a work-study session of the planning and 
zoning commission scheduled at least five 
days prior to the public hearing for the con­
sideration of a proposed text amendment 
that imposes a regulation not previously im­
posed or that removes or modifies any such 
regulation previously imposed. Landowners 
and other citizens potentially affected by the 
proposed text amendments will be invited to 
gather further information regarding the 
proposed text amendments at the citizen re­
view session and to express any issues or 
concerns they may have with the proposed 
text amendment. 
2. Notice of the citizen review session 
shall be given to landowners and other citi­
zens potentially affected by the proposed text 
amendments at least ten days prior to the plan­
ning and zoning commission work-study ses­
sion scheduled for the citizen review of the 
proposed test amendments. This notice shall 
state the date, time, and place of the citizen 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 1, 6-05) 
===PAGE 53===
review session and shall include a general ex­
planation of the substance of the proposed text 
amendment to the zoning ordinance. The form 
of notice to be used will vary according to the 
type of text amendment proposed, and any 
means deemed by the city to provide the ap­
propriate method of notice for the proposed 
text amendment shall be considered sufficient. 
The form of notice given may include, but is 
not limited to, the following: 
A. Publication in a local newspaper dis-
tributed to residents living within the city. 
B. Posting at official city posting locations. 
C. Posting on the city's web site. 
3. After the citizen review session, the 
planning and zoning commission may take all 
issues and concerns raised by landowners and 
other citizens potentially affected by the pro­
posed text amendments at such session into 
account when it considers its recommendation 
to the city council on the proposed text 
amendment and shall, prior to the council's 
public hearing on the proposed text amend­
ment, report to the council the issues and con­
cerns raised during the citizen review input 
and discussion session. (Ord. 05-100 § 1 
(part); Ord. 03-85 § 1 (part)) 
4.06 Notice of Public Hearing 
a. All applications for text amendments 
shall be considered by the commission and 
council at a public hearing, notice of which 
shall be given in accordance with provisions 
of the Arizona Revised Statutes. 
b. I. All applications for map amend­
ments shall be considered by the commission 
and council at a public hearing, notice of 
which shall be given in accordance with the 
provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes. Addi­
tional notice shall be given in the following 
manner: each notice of public hearing shall be 
posted at City Hall, the public library and at 
27 
4.05 
other locations in the city that the city clerk 
may deem as necessary or advisable. 
2. Notice of the time, date and place of 
hearings on map amendments shall be sent to 
all owners of property within one hundred 
fifty feet of the affected property. Unless oth­
erwise provided, addresses for a mailed notice 
required by this code shall be obtained from 
the county's real property tax records. The 
failure of a property owner to receive notice 
shall not invalidate an action if a good faith 
attempt was made to comply with the re­
quirements of this code for notice. In addition 
to persons whom receive notice as required by 
the matter under consideration, the city may 
provide notice to others is it has reason to be­
lieve that they are affected or otherwise repre­
sent an interest that may be affected by the 
proposed development. 
c. See Section 25 .04(b) for special notice 
requirements for amendment of open space 
designation. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part); Ord. 03-
85 § 1 (part); Ord. 95-30 § 1) 
4.07 Public Hearing by Commission on 
Applications 
Every application for amendment of this 
code shall be considered by the commission at 
a public hearing. See Section 25.04(a) for ad­
ditional hearing requirements for amendment 
of open space designation. 
a. Procedures 
The order of proceedings for the hearing 
shall be as follows: 
l. The chairman will state the case and 
call the public hearing to order. The chairman 
may establish the time allowed for the presen­
tation of information. 
2. Presentation of staff report. 
3. Presentation of information by the 
applicant. 
(Litchfield Park Z..ming Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 54===
4. Presentation by public in favor of the 
application. 
5. Presentation by public opposing the 
application. 
6. Response of applicant to matters raised 
by those in opposition. 
7. Response of staff to matters raised by 
those in opposition. 
8. Questions by commissioners. 
9. At the close of presentations and re­
sponses, the chairman shall declare the public 
hearing closed unless there is a motion to con­
tinue the public hearing. Additional written 
materials may be permitted at the discretion of 
the commission. 
I 0. Once a hearing has been closed, it shall 
be reopened only upon a majority vote of the 
commission. 
b. Criteria 
Map amendments shall: 
1. Be consistent with adopted plans or 
policies of the city. 
2. Not have adverse impacts on the level 
of municipal or utility service to other prop­
erties. 
c. Decision by Commission 
1. After the public hearing, the commis­
sion shall render its decision in the form of a 
written recommendation to the council. 
2. The recommendation shall include the 
reasons for the recommendation. The rec­
ommendation may include approval of a 
change of zone conditioned upon a schedule 
of development of the specific use or uses for 
which rezoning is requested and conditioned 
upon conformance with additional restric­
tions or requirements recommended by the 
commission. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part); Ord. 03-
85 § I (part)) 
28 
4.07 
4.08 Protests Against Amendments 
If the owners of twenty percent or more, ( 1) 
either of the area of the lots included in a pro­
posed change or (2) of those immediately ad­
jacent in the rear or any side thereof extending 
one hundred and fifty feet therefrom, or (3) of 
those directly opposite thereto extending one 
hundred and fifty feet from the street frontage 
of the opposite lots, file a written protest 
against a proposed amendment, it shall not 
become effective except by the favorable vote 
of three-fourths of all members of the council. 
If any members of the council are unable to 
vote on such a question because of a conflict 
of interest, then, the required number of votes 
for passage of the question shall be three­
fourths of the remaining membership of the 
council, provided that such required number 
of votes for passage shall in no event be less 
than a majority of the full membership of the 
council. (Ord. 03-85 § 1 (part)) 
4.09 Reconsideration of Denied Map 
Amendments 
In the event that an application for a map 
amendment is denied by the council or is 
withdrawn after the commission hearing, the 
commission shall not reconsider the applica­
tion nor consider another application for the 
same map amendment of this code as it ap­
plies to the same property described in the 
original application or any part thereof, for a 
period of not less than one year from the date 
of such denial action. The commission may, 
however, after due deliberation and approval 
of a specific motion consider denial without 
prejudice leaving open the opportunity for the 
applicant to ask for another hearing on the 
matter within the one year prohibition period. 
In any case, if fees are required then they must 
be paid with each application for hearing. 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 1, 6-05) 
===PAGE 55===
a. Significance of Approval and 
Restoration 
Approval of a map amendment constitutes 
authorization for the development of property 
under applicable regulation. Approval is valid 
for a period of twelve months from date. If 
approval expires prior to receipt of required 
permits and readily apparent evidence of site 
grading, implementation of drainage measures 
or installation of site infrastructure elements 
on the property, the council may revert the 
zoning designation to that which existed be­
fore the map amendment was granted. 
b. Map Amendment Conditioned Upon 
Site Plan Approval 
The council may approve a map amend­
ment conditional upon a schedule for devel­
opment of the specific use or uses for which 
the change is requested. Applicants requesting 
change under this section shall submit for 
consideration by the commission and council, 
a statement of the use or uses for which the 
change is requested, a specific schedule for 
development detailing the commencement and 
completion dates of the development of the 
proposed use and a site plan, prepared in ac­
cordance with the provisions of this code, de­
tailing the development plan for the proposed 
use. The submitted items will be considered 
by the commission and council at public hear­
ings in accordance with the provisions of this 
section. Approval of the site plan by the 
commission shall be conditional upon ap­
proval of the amendment by the council. The 
council may approve the amendment. If the 
council chooses to approve the amendment, 
approval shall be conditional upon develop­
ment of the use or uses shown on the ap­
proved site plan within the period of time 
stated in the schedule of development. If at the 
expiration of this period the property has not 
been improved for the use for which it was 
28-1 
4.09 
conditionally approved, the council may re­
vert the zoning of the property to its former 
classification following notice and hearing 
required by A.R.S. § 9-462.0 I (E). (Ord. 04-91 
§ I (part); Ord. 03-85 § I (part)) 
4.10 General Plan Amendments 
General plan amendments include revisions 
of land use intensity, plans for limited access 
roadways and deletion of a requirement to 
reserve or dedicate land for public purpose. 
a. Criteria 
Any of the following criteria is considered 
as grounds for a major general plan amend­
ment, requiring a vote of at least two-thirds of 
the members of city council: 
1. Change of use - Redesignation of 
land, ten acres or more in area and not a part 
of a larger, mixed-use planned development, 
from a residential classification to commercial 
or industrial use. 
2. Change in intensity - Redesignation 
ofland from one residential use classification 
to another residential classification of fifty 
percent or greater additional density or to re­
sort residential classification. 
3. Change in open space or golf course 
designation - Redesignation of land from 
open space or golf course use to another land 
use classification. 
b. Special Study Area 
Any property contained within a previ­
ously-approved master plan of development 
may be initiated by the property owner for 
consideration as, and designated by city 
council, in its discretion, as a special study 
area. Recommended adjustments to land use 
or development intensity in the special study 
area shall be processed through planning 
commission and city council hearings for any 
necessary rezoning, subdivision or site plan 
approval. (Ord. 04-91 § I (part)) 
(Litchfield Parle Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 56===
SECTIONS 
FEES* 
Subsections: 
5.01 Fee Schedule 
5.03 Waiver or Refund 
5.04 Impact Fees 
• Editor's Note:§ 5.02 was repealed by Ord. 02-79. 
5.01 Fee Schedule 
Fees for all zoning change amendments 
(map or text), use pennits, variances, plan re­
view, design review, signs, impact mitigation 
or appeals are established; and, from time to 
time, revised by the Litchfield Park city coun­
cil. Fee schedules are kept on file in city hall. 
5.03 Waiver or Refund 
Applicable fees, in whole or in part, may be 
waived only for nonprofit organizations and 
by the city council. No refunds of application 
fees may be approved other than subsequent 
fee waivers approved by city council. 
5.04 Impact Fees 
Fees to defray costs for establishing and 
maintaining municipal improvements (includ­
ing, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, cart­
paths, water, sewer, drainage, parks, public 
landscaping, libraries, recreation centers and 
public arts) will be charged according to a 
schedule of proportionate service allocations 
for residential and nonresidential properties 
adopted, and from time to time revised, by the 
council. Such fees are due and payable prior 
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy 
for any included structure or property. 
5.01 
29 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 1, 6-05) 
===PAGE 57===
SECTION 6 
INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT 
Subsections: 
6.01 Interpretation 
6.02 Conflict 
6.01 Interpretation 
In interpreting and applying the provisions 
of this code, they shall be held to be the mini­
mum requirements for the promotion of the 
public safety, health, convenience, comfort, 
prosperity, and general welfare. 
6.02 Conflict 
It is not intended by this code to interfere 
with, abrogate or annul any ordinances, rules, 
regulations, or permits previously adopted or 
issued, and not in conflict with any of the 
provisions of this code, or which shall be 
adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to 
the use of buildings or premises and likewise 
not in conflict with this code; nor is it intend­
ed by this code to interfere with or abrogate 
or annul any easements, covenants, or other 
agreements between parties, except that if this 
code imposes a greater restriction, this code 
shall control. 
6.01 
30 
===PAGE 58===
SECTION 7 
SAVING CLAUSE AND EFFECTIVE 
DATE 
Subsections: 
7.01 Saving 
7.02 Effective Date 
7.01 Saving 
The invalidity of any section of the code 
shall not affect the validity of the remainder 
of said section or the remainder of this code. 
7.02 Effective Date 
This code shall be in full force and effect 
from and after its passage, approval and publi­
cations, as required by law. 
7.01 
31 
===PAGE 59===
8.01
32 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 9, 3-11)
SECTION 8
VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND 
PENALTIES
Subsections:
8.01 Invalid Permits and Approvals
8.02 City Reliance on Information 
Supplied
8.03 Code Enforcement Officer
8.04 Enforcement Responsibilities
8.05 Violation; Notice and 
Opportunity to Correct
8.06 Violations and Citations
8.07 Penalties
8.08 Habitual Offenders
8.09 Cumulative Procedures and 
Remedies
8.10 Failure to Provide Evidence of 
Identity
8.01 Invalid Permits and Approvals
Any permit issued or administrative
approval granted in conflict with any provision
of the zoning code, a zoning ordinance, a use
permit, a variance, or a design review approval
is void, unless relief is granted pursuant to Sec-
tion 3.02(h) or 3.04(f). (Ord. 06-113 § 1 (part))
8.02 City Reliance on Information 
Supplied
a. Duty to Supply Accurate Information
Any person seeking a permit or approval
from the city of Litchfield Park, Arizona, shall
submit accurate information to the city of
Litchfield Park, Arizona, and shall promptly
notify the city of Litchfield Park, Arizona, in
writing, of any inaccuracies in information pre-
viously submitted.
b. No Warranty
The city of Litchfield Park, Arizona, in issu-
ing a permit or approval is not expressly or
impliedly warrantying the location of property
lines, accuracy of plans or any other informa-
tion supplied by an applicant.
c. Revocation
If the city of Litchfield Park, Arizona, dis-
covers a permit or approval was issued in reli-
ance on inaccurate information supplied by the
applicant, and the permitted or approved struc-
ture, work or use in fact does not or will not
comply with applicable city code(s), in addi-
tion to the general penalty set forth in this sec-
tion, the city of Litchfield Park, Arizona,
reserves the right to revoke the permit or
approval, and shall not be liable for any result-
ing costs or inconvenience. (Ord. 11-160 § 1
(part))
8.03 Code Enforcement Officer
The code enforcement officer shall have the
authority to enforce the provisions of the zon-
ing code, zoning ordinances, use permits, vari-
ances, and design review approvals and to issue
citations for violations thereof. The code
enforcement officer shall be appointed by the
city manager. (Ord. 11-160 § 1 (part); Ord. 06-
113 § 1 (part). Formerly 8.02.)
8.04 Enforcement Responsibilities
a. Building Department
Prior to issuance of building permits, the
building department shall ascertain that plans
presented with the building permit application
comply with those approved subject to the
requirements of the zoning code, a zoning ordi-
nance, a use permit, a variance or a design
review approval, as applicable.
===PAGE 60===
8.05
32-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 9, 3-11)
b. Code Enforcement Officer
The code enforcement officer shall enforce
the provisions of the zoning code, zoning ordi-
nances, use permits, variances and design
review approvals and is authorized to stop any
work undertaken not in compliance with any
provision of the zoning code, a zoning ordi-
nance, a use permit, a variance, or a design
review approval.
c. City Attorney
The city attorney may commence an action
in superior court to abate a violation of the zon-
ing code, a zoning ordinance, a use permit, a
variance or a design review approval. (Ord. 11-
160 § 1 (part); Ord. 06-113 § 1 (part). Formerly
8.03.)
8.05 Violation; Notice and Opportunity to 
Correct
a. Notice
Before issuing a citation for a violation of
the zoning code, a zoning ordinance, a use per-
mit, a variance, or a design review approval, the
code enforcement officer shall provide a writ-
ten notice of the violation to the property owner
and person in control, or to the authorized agent
of the property. The notice shall set forth:
1. The violation.
2. What is required to bring the property
into compliance.
3. The time period allowed to bring the
property into compliance.
b. Time Period
The time period provided to correct viola-
tions of the zoning code, a zoning ordinance, a
use permit, a variance, or a design review
approval other than signs shall be a minimum
of ten days, unless the violation creates a safety
hazard, in which case the time period for cor-
rection shall be determined by the code
enforcement officer based on the severity of the
danger. The time period provided to correct
violations of sign regulations are set forth in
Sections 35.12, 35.14, 35.15, and 35.31(a)(12),
all of which set forth times for notice to correct
violations of Section 35, Signs. A citation is
considered an appropriate notice in the case of
violations of Section 35 for signs installed
without required permits.
c. Failure to Receive Notice
Failure of the property owner, person in con-
trol, or authorized agent of the property to
receive a notice shall not preclude issuance of
a citation. (Ord. 11-160 § 1 (part); Ord. 06-113
§ 1 (part). Formerly 8.04.)
8.06 Violations and Citations
If a violation of the zoning code, a zoning
ordinance, a use permit, a variance, or a design
review approval continues past the time set
forth in the notice of violation, a citation shall
be issued to the property owner, person in con-
trol, or authorized agent of the property.
a. A civil action for violations shall be
commenced by filing the citation in the city of
Litchfield Park magistrate court.
b. Citations may be issued by the code
enforcement officer, by a city of Litchfield
Park police officer, or by a sworn officer of
another police or sheriff’s office acting on
behalf of the city of Litchfield Park.
c. Each day a violation continues, or the
failure to perform any act or duty required by
the zoning code, a zoning ordinance, a use per-
mit, a variance, a design review approval or by
the city of Litchfield Park magistrate court con-
tinues, shall constitute a separate civil offense.
d. Every civil action or proceeding under
this section shall be commenced and prose-
cuted in accordance with the laws of the state
of Arizona relating to civil traffic procedures
and the Arizona Rules of Procedure in civil
===PAGE 61===
8.07
32-2 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 9, 3-11)
traffic violation cases. (Ord. 11-160 § 1 (part);
Ord. 06-113 § 1 (part). Formerly 8.05.)
8.07 Penalties
a. A citation issued pursuant to Section
8.04 shall direct the person to whom the cita-
tion is issued to pay a fine in the amount set
forth in the city of Litchfield Park magistrate
court’s adopted schedule of fines within ten
days of the issuance of the citation or to appear
before the city of Litchfield Park magistrate
court. Payment of the fine shall constitute a
finding of responsibility for the violation for
purposes of Section 8.07.
b. Upon a finding by the city of Litchfield
Park magistrate court that a person is responsi-
ble for a civil violation of the zoning code, a
zoning ordinance, a use permit, a variance or a
design review approval, that person, corpora-
tion, or other legal entity shall be subject to a
civil fine of not more than five hundred dollars
for each violation imposed by the city magis-
trate court.
c. Any judgment for civil fines or penalties
may be collected as any other civil judgment,
as provided for in the Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 11-160 § 1 (part); Ord. 06-113 § 1 (part).
Formerly 8.06.)
8.08 Habitual Offenders
a. Any person found responsible by the
city of Litchfield Park magistrate court for
committing three or more civil violations of the
zoning code, a zoning ordinance, a use permit,
variance or design review approval within a
twenty-four-month period, whether by admis-
sion, by payment of the fine, by default or by
judgment after hearing shall be determined to
be a habitual offender. For purposes of calcu-
lating the twenty-four-month period under this
subsection a, the dates of the commission of the
offenses are the determining factor.
b. A habitual offender who subsequently
violates the zoning code, a zoning ordinance, a
use permit, variance, or design review approval
shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor
offense.
c. Upon the conviction of a habitual
offender for a violation of the zoning code, a
zoning ordinance, a use permit, variance, or
design review approval, the court may:
1. Impose a sentence of incarceration not
to exceed six months in jail; or
2. Impose a fine not to exceed two thou-
sand five hundred dollars, exclusive of penalty
assessments prescribed by law; or
3. Impose a term of probation; or
4. Impose any combination of incarcera-
tion, fine, and probation.
d. Notwithstanding the above elective pen-
alty, upon conviction of a habitual offender of
a violation of the zoning code, a zoning ordi-
nance, a use permit, variance, or design review
approval, the court shall impose a fine of not
less than five hundred dollars for each count
upon which a conviction is obtained.
e. A judge shall not grant probation to a
habitual offender or suspend any part of a sen-
tence or fine imposed upon a habitual offender
for any sentence required by this subsection,
except on the condition that the habitual
offender pays the fine imposed by the court, as
provided in this section.
f. Every action or proceeding under this
section shall be commenced and prosecuted in
accordance with the laws of the state of Ari-
zona relating to misdemeanors and the Arizona
Rules of Criminal Procedure. (Ord. 11-160 § 1
(part); Ord. 06-113 § 1 (part). Formerly 8.07.)
===PAGE 62===
8.09
32-3 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 9, 3-11)
8.09 Cumulative Procedures and 
Remedies
The procedures and remedies provided for
herein shall be cumulative and in addition to
any other procedures and remedies to which the
town may be entitled by law or equity. (Ord.
11-160 § 1 (part); Ord. 06-113 § 1 (part). For-
merly 8.08.)
8.10 Failure to Provide Evidence of 
Identity
A person who fails or refuses to provide evi-
dence of his or her identity to the city of Litch-
field Park building official, a building
inspector, the code enforcement officer, or a
police officer or any other authorized agent of
the city upon request, when such agent has rea-
sonable cause to believe the person has com-
mitted a violation of the zoning code, is guilty
of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Evidence of identity
shall consist of a person’s full name, residence
address, and date of birth. (Ord. 11-160 § 1
(part); Ord. 06-113 § 1 (part). Formerly 8.09.)
===PAGE 63===
9.01
33 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 4,  2-08)
SECTION 9
DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES 
THEREOF
Subsections:
9.01 Purpose
9.02 Boundaries and Map
9.03 Annexation
9.04 Boundary Line
9.05 General Conditions
9.06 Map Appended
9.07 Overlay Districts
9.01 Purpose
In order to implement the city of Litchfield
Park general plan policies to accommodate
compatible, accessible mixtures of land use in
a village context where persons may reside,
shop, engage in community activities, work
and play in close proximity; classify, regulate,
and restrict the location of business, trades,
industries, residences and other land uses, and
the location of buildings designed for specific
uses; to regulate and limit the height and bulk
of buildings thereafter erected, reconstructed,
or structurally altered; to regulate and limit the
intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate
and determine the area of yards, courts and
other open spaces within and surrounding such
buildings, the city of Litchfield Park, Arizona
is hereby divided into eighteen “districts.” The
use, heights and area regulations are set forth
for each district and said districts shall be
known as:
(Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
9.02 Boundaries and Map
The boundaries of these districts are shown
upon the map or supplementary maps and made
a part of this code, which map is designated as
the “Litchfield Park Zoning Map.” The zoning
map and all notations, references and other
information shown thereon were fully set forth
and described herein, which zoning map is
attached hereto and made a part of this code by
reference and any supplementary zoning map
adopted by ordinance shall become a part of
this code by reference as though fully set forth
herein.
RE Residential Estate
R1 Low Density Residential
R1-15 Low Medium Density 
Residential
R1-8 Medium Density Residential
R1-6 High Medium Density 
Residential
RC (Cluster) High Density Residential
MFL Low Density Multifamily 
Residential
MFM Medium Density Multifamily 
Residential
MFH High Density Multifamily 
Residential
PH Patio Home Residential
RT Resort
NC Neighborhood Commercial
CS Community Commercial
RS Regional Commercial
I General Industrial
OS Open Space
PD Planned Development
PF Public Facilities
HPOD Historic Preservation Overlay 
District
===PAGE 64===
9.03
34 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 4,  2-08)
9.03 Annexation
a. All territory which may hereafter be
annexed to the city of Litchfield Park, Arizona
shall automatically continue Maricopa County
zoning designations for a period not more than
six months. Within such six-month period, a
map amendment shall be adopted establishing
city zoning.
b. As part of any application for annex-
ation to the city, the property owners of the ter-
ritory proposed to be annexed shall submit an
agreement to waive claims for diminution in
value as set forth in Section 3.07. (Ord. 07-134
§ 1 (part); Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
9.04 Boundary Line
Whenever any street, alley, or other public
way is vacated by official action of the council,
the zoning districts adjoining each side of such
street, alley or public way shall be automati-
cally extended to the center of such vacation
and all area included in the vacation shall then
and henceforth be subject to all appropriate
regulations of the extended districts.
9.05 General Conditions
Except as hereinafter provided:
a. No building shall be erected, converted,
enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered,
nor shall any building or land be used except in
conformity with use, height, area, and parking
regulations in the district in which the building
or land is located.
b. The minimum yards and other open
spaces, including lot area per family, required
by this code for each and every building exist-
ing at the time of passage of this code, or for
any building hereafter erected, shall not be
encroached upon or considered as yard or open
space requirements for any other building; nor
shall any lot area be reduced beyond the district
regulations of this code.
c. Every building hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be located on a lot as
herein defined and in no case shall there be
more than one main building on one lot, except
as otherwise provided.
d. No accessory building shall be leased,
subleased, or rented, separate and apart from
the main building and no main building shall be
leased, subleased, or rented, separate and apart
from an accessory building.
e. No lot may be resubdivided into smaller
lot or lots.
f. No farm livestock may be kept on any
residential lot.
g. Housepets may be kept in reasonable
number and so long as they do not constitute a
nuisance in the neighborhood.
h. No business or professional offices may
be maintained on residential lots or in the resi-
dences thereon unless the office is determined
to be a home occupation. A group home for the
handicapped is permitted so long as the group
home is operated in accordance with applicable
federal and state law and this code.
i. Signs may be displayed under restric-
tions set forth in the ensuing section applying
to residential districts.
j. Any store, warehouse, or repair shop
activity is prohibited on any residential lot.
k. Only an entire lot together with
improvements thereon may be rented to a sin-
gle family. Occupancy of trailers, recreational
vehicles, or vans is prohibited on any residen-
tial lot. (Ord. 97-42 § 1 (part))
9.06 Map Appended
Appended to this code is a map of the city of
Litchfield Park appropriately marked to desig-
nate the various zoning districts.
===PAGE 65===
9.07
34-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 4,  2-08)
9.07 Overlay Districts
Site plan approval is required for develop-
ments located in overlay districts.
a. Regulations pertaining to the base, or
underlying district, and general conditions set
forth in Section 9.05, shall apply to uses, lots or
portions of lots included within an overlay dis-
trict unless specifically modified in the map
amendment or by condition of zoning.
b. Additional requirements may be estab-
lished to further the purposes of the overlay dis-
trict.
c. Historic preservation overlay district
development proposals shall observe architec-
tural themes, structural scale and building
massing consistent with other properties in the
district. Use permit approval may, in appropri-
ate circumstances, be granted as an incentive
for property owners’ consent to be included in
the district. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
===PAGE 66===
SECTION 10 
RESIDENTIAL ESTATE (RE) 
DISTRICT 
Subsections: 
10.01 Land Use Definition 
10.02 
10.03 
10.04 
10.05 
10.06 
Use Regulations 
Property Development 
Standards 
Height Regulations 
Setback Regulations 
Additional Regulations 
10.01 Land Use Definition 
Residential estate (RE): the principal land 
use is a single-family dwelling on a subdivi­
sion lot having an area of one acre or greater. 
In this category, no residences shall have a 
livable floor area of less than three thousand 
square feet. 
10.02 Use Regulations 
A building or premises shall be used only 
for the purposes set forth in the city of Litch­
field Park zoning matrix (Section 28). 
10.03 Property Development Standards 
Unless otherwise accepted as part of a de­
velopment plan at the time of zoning ap­
proval, the following development standards 
shall be observed: 
a. In the residential estate district, every 
residential lot shall have an area of not less 
than forty three thousand five hundred sixty 
square feet, and a width of not less than one 
hundred fifty feet. 
b. Primary buildings and other structures 
shall not cover more than thirty percent of 
the lot. 
35 
10.01 
c. Open Space Density Bonus 
Provision of common open space totaling 
not less than twenty percent of the net site 
area, shall entitle the developer to observe the 
property development standards of the low 
density residential (RI) district. (Ord. 04-91 
§ 1 (part)) 
10.04 Height Regulations 
No building shall exceed one story nor 
twenty-five feet in height; or if accepted as 
part of a development plan at the time of zon­
ing approval, two stories or thirty-five feet. 
10.05 Setback Regulations 
Unless otherwise accepted as part of a de­
velopment plan at the time of zoning approval, 
the following setbacks shall be provided: 
a. Front Yard 
I. There shall be a front yard having a 
depth of not less than forty feet. 
2. Where a lot is located at the intersec­
tion of two or more streets, there shall be a 
yard conforming to the front yard require­
ments on each street side of a comer Jot. No 
accessory building shall project into yards 
required to conform with the front yard re­
quirements. 
b. Side Yard 
There shall be a side yard on each side of a 
building having a width of not less than thirty 
feet. 
c. RearYard 
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of 
not less than forty feet. 
10.06 Additional Regulations 
a. Any exterior lighting shall be directed 
downward and away from adjacent property 
in accordance with the city code and this zon­
ing code. See Section 31.15. 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 1. 6-05) 
===PAGE 67===
b. Provisions for on-site stonnwater reten­
tion/drainage and off-site stonnwater drainage 
both entering and leaving the property shall be 
as required by the city of Litchfield Park and 
the Maricopa County Flood Control District; 
the procedures for which shall be approved by 
the council. 
35-1 
10.06 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 68===
SECTION 11 
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (RI) 
DISTRICT 
Subsections: 
11.01 Land Use Definition 
11.02 
11.03 
11.04 
11.05 
11.06 
Use Regulations 
Property Development 
Standards 
Height Regulations 
Setback Regulations 
Additional Regulations 
11.01 Land Use Definition 
Low density residential (RI): the principal 
land use is a single-family dwelling on a sub­
division lot of at least one half acre in area. 
No residences in this category shall have liv­
able floor area ofless than two thousand three 
hundred fifty square feet. 
11.02 Use Regulations 
A building or premises shall be used only 
for the purposes as set forth in the city of 
Litchfield Park zoning matrix (Section 28). 
11.03 Property Development Standards 
Unless otherwise accepted as part of a de­
velopment plan at the time of zoning ap­
proval, the following development standards 
shall be observed: 
a. In the low density residential district, 
every residential lot shall have an area of not 
less than twenty one thousand seven hundred 
eighty square feet, and a width of not less than 
one hundred ten feet. 
b. Primary buildings and other struc­
tures shall not cover more than thirty per­
cent of the lot. 
36 
11.01 
c. Open Space Density Bonus 
Provision of common open space totaling 
not less than twenty percent of the net site 
area, shall entitle the developer to observe the 
property development standards (except 
minimum development area) and the setback 
regulations of the next less restrictive residen­
tial district. (Ord. 04-91 § I (part)) 
11.04 Height Regulations 
No building shall exceed one story nor 
twenty-five feet in height, or if accepted as 
part of a development plan approved at the 
time of zoning approval, two stories or thirty­
five feet. 
11.05 Setback Regulations 
Unless otherwise accepted as part of a 
development plan at the time of zoning ap­
proval, the following setbacks shall be pro­
vided: 
a. Front Yard 
1. There shall be a front yard having a 
depth of not less than thirty-five feet. 
2. Where a lot is located atthe intersec­
tion of two or more streets, there shall be a 
yard conforming to the front yard require­
ments on each street side of a comer lot. No 
accessory building shall project into yards 
required to conform with the front yard re­
quirements. 
b. SideYard 
There shall be a side yard on each side of a 
building having a width of not less than fif­
teen feet. 
c. RearYard 
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of 
not less than thirty-five feet. 
11.06 Additional Regulations 
a. Any exterior lighting shall be directed 
downward and away from adjacent property 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 1, 6-05) 
===PAGE 69===
in accordance with the city code and this zon­
ing code. See Section 3 1.15. 
b. Provisions for on-site stonnwater reten­
tion/drainage and off-site stonnwater drainage 
both entering and leaving the property shall be 
as required by the city of Litchfield Park and 
the Maricopa County Flood Control District; 
the procedures for which shall be approved by 
the council. 
36-1 
11.06 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I. 6-05) 
===PAGE 70===
SECTION 12 
LOW MEDIUM DENSITY 
RESIDENTIAL (Rl-15) DISTRICT 
Subsections: 
12.01 Land Use Definition 
12.02 Use Regulations 
12.03 Property Development 
Standards 
12.04 
12.05 
12.06 
Height Regulations 
Setback Regulations 
Additional Regulations 
12.01 Land Use Definition 
Low medium density residential (Rl-15): 
the principal land use is a single-family dwell­
ing on a subdivision Jot of at least fifteen 
thousand square feet in area. Each residence 
must have a minimum livable floor area of 
one thousand eight hundred fifty square feet. 
12.02 Use Regulations 
A building or premises shall be used only 
for the purposes as set forth in the city of 
Litchfield Park zoning matrix (Section 28). 
12.03 Property Development Standards 
Unless otherwise accepted as part of a de­
velopment plan at the time of zoning ap­
proval, the following development standards 
shall be observed: 
a. In the low medium density residential 
district, every residential lot shall have an area 
of not less than fifteen thousand square feet, 
and a width of not less than eighty feet. 
b. Primary buildings and other structures 
shall not cover more than thirty percent of the 
lot. 
c. Open Space Density Bonus 
Provision of common open space totaling 
not less than twenty percent of the net site 
37 
12.01 
area, shall entitle the developer to observe the 
property development standards (except 
minimum development area) and the setback 
regulations of the next less restrictive residen­
tial district. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part)) 
12.04 Height Regulations 
No building shall exceed one story nor 
twenty-five feet in height; or, if accepted as 
part of a development plan at the time of zon­
ing approval, two stories or thirty-five feet. 
12.05 Setback Regulations 
Unless otherwise accepted as part of a 
development plan at the time of zoning ap­
proval, the following setbacks shall be pro­
vided: 
a. Front Yard 
1. There shall be a front yard having a 
depth of not less than thirty feet. 
2. Where a lot is located at the intersec­
tion of two or more streets, there shall be a 
yard conforming to the front yard require­
ments on each street side of a corner lot. No 
accessory building shall project into yards 
required to conform with the front yard re­
quirements. 
b. Side Yard 
There shall be a side yard on each side of a 
building having a width of not less than fif­
teen feet. 
c. RearYard 
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of 
not less than thirty feet. 
12.06 Additional Regulations 
a. Any exterior lighting shall be directed 
downward and away from adjacent property 
in accordance with the city code and this zon­
ing code. See Section 31. I 5. 
b. Provisions for on-site stormwater reten­
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 71===
both entering and leaving the property shall be 
as required by the city of Litchfield Park and 
the Maricopa County Flood Control District; 
the procedures for which shall be approved by 
the council. 
38 
12.06 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 72===
SECTION 13 
MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL 
(Rl-8) DISTRICT 
Subsections: 
13.01 Land Use Definition 
13.02 Use Regulations 
13.03 Property Development 
Standards 
13.04 Height Regulations 
13.05 Setback Regulations 
13.06 Additional Regulations 
13.01 Land Use Definition 
Medium density residential (Rl-8): the 
principal land use is a single-family dwelling, 
including cluster housing. No residence in this 
category shall have livable floor area of less 
than one thousand five hundred square feet. 
13.02 Use Regulations 
A building or premises shall be used only 
for the purposes as set forth in the city of 
Litchfield Park zoning matrix (Section 28). 
13.03 Property Development Standards. 
Unless otherwise accepted as part of a de­
velopment plan at the time of zoning ap­
proval, the following development standards 
shall be observed: 
a. In the medium density residential dis­
trict, every residential lot shall have an area of 
not less than eight thousand square feet, and a 
width of not less than sixty feet. 
b. Primary buildings and other structures 
shall not cover more than forty percent of the lot. 
c. Open Space Density Bonus 
Provision of common open space totaling 
not less than twenty percent of the net site 
area, shall entitle the developer to observe 
the property development standards (except 
39 
13.01 
minimum development area) and the setback 
regulations of the next less restrictive resi­
dential district. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part)) 
13.04 Height Regulations 
No building shall exceed one story nor 
twenty-five feet in height; or if accepted as 
part of a development plan at the time of zon­
ing approval, two stories or thirty-five feet. 
13.05 Setback Regulations 
Unless otherwise accepted as part of a devel­
opment plan at the time of zoning approval, the 
following setbacks shall be provided: 
a. Front Yard 
1. There shall be a front yard having a 
depth of not less than twenty-five feet. 
2. Where a lot is located at the intersection 
of two or more streets, there shall be a yard 
conforming to the front yard requirements on 
each street side of a comer lot. No accessory 
building shall project into yards required to 
conform with the front yard requirements. 
b. Side Yard 
There shail be a side yard on each side of a 
building having a width of not less than 
twelve feet. 
c. RearYard 
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of 
not less than twenty-five feet. 
13.06 Additional Regulations 
a. Any exterior lighting shall be directed 
downward and away from adjacent property 
in accordance with the city code and this zon­
ing code. See Section 31.15. 
b. Provisions for on-site stormwater reten­
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage 
both entering and leaving the property shall be 
as required by the city of Litchfield Park and 
the Maricopa County Flood Control District; 
the procedures for which shall be approved by 
the council. 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I. 6-05) 
===PAGE 73===
SECTION 14 
HIGH MEDIUM DENSITY 
RESIDENTIAL (Rl-6) DISTRICT 
Subsections: 
14.01 Land Use Definition 
14.02 Use Regulations 
14.03 Property Development 
Standards 
14.04 Height Regulations 
14.05 Setback Regulations 
14.06 Additional Regulations 
14.01 Land Use Definition 
High medium density residential (Rl-6): 
the principal land uses of this district are sin­
gle-family dwellings. No residence in this dis­
trict shall have livable floor area of less than 
one thousand two hundred square feet. 
14.02 Use Regulations 
A building or premises shall be used only 
for the purposes set forth in the city of Litch­
field Park zoning matrix (Section 28). 
14.03 Property Development Standards 
Unless otherwise accepted as part of a de­
velopment plan at the time of zoning ap­
proval, the following development standards 
shall be provided: 
a. In the high medium density residential 
district, every residential lot shall have an area 
of not less than six thousand square feet, and a 
width of not less than forty feet. 
b. Primary buildings and other structures 
shall not cover more than fifty percent of the lot. 
c. Open Space Density Bonus 
Provision of common open space totaling 
not less than twenty percent of the net site 
area, shall entitle the developer to observe 
the property development standards (except 
40 
14.01 
minimum development area) and the setback 
regulations of the next less restrictive resi­
dential district. ( Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part)) 
14.04 Height Regulations 
No building shall exceed one story nor 
twenty-five feet in height: or if accepted as 
part of a development plan at the time of zon­
ing approval, two stories or thirty-five feet. 
14.05 Setback Regulations 
Unless otherwise accepted as part of a devel­
opment plan at the time of zoning approval, the 
following setbacks shall be provided: 
a. Front Yard 
I. There shall be a front yard having a 
depth of not less than twenty feet. 
2. Where a lot is located at the intersection 
of two or more streets, there shall be a yard con­
forming to the front yard requirements on each 
street side of a comer lot. No accessory building 
shall project into yards required to conform with 
the front yard requirements. 
b. Side Yard 
There shall be a side yard on each side of a 
building having a width of not less than ten feet. 
c. RearYard 
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of 
not less than twenty feet. 
14.06 Additional Regulations 
a. Any exterior lighting shall be directed 
downward and away from adjacent property 
in accordance with the city code and this zon­
ing code. See Section 31.15. 
b. Provisions for on-site stormwater reten­
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage 
both entering and leaving the property shall be 
as required by the city of Litchfield Park and 
the Maricopa County Flood Control District; 
the procedures for which shall be approved by 
the council. 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 74===
SECTION 15 
HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL 
(RC Cluster) DISTRICT 
Subsections: 
15.01 Land Use Definition 
15.02 Use Regulations 
15.03 Property Development 
Standards 
15.04 
15.05 
15.06 
Height Regulations 
Setback Regulations 
Additional Regulations 
15.01 Land Use Definition 
High density residential (RC Cluster): this 
zoning provides for multifamily housing only. 
Dwelling units in this category shall have liv­
able floor area as may be approved by the 
commission upon submittal of a use plan by 
the developer. 
15.02 Use Regulations 
A building or premises shall be used only 
for the purposes as set forth in the city of 
Litchfield Park zoning matrix (Section 28). 
15.03 Property Development Standards 
a. Development Area 
Each development shall have a minimum 
area of five acres. 
b. Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit 
The minimum lot area per dwelling unit 
shall be three thousand six hundred square 
feet within the development. 
c. Coverage 
The maximum coverage shall be sixty per­
cent of the development area. 
d. Distance Between Buildings 
The minimum distance between buildings 
on the same lot shall be ten feet. 
41 
15.01 
e. Buffers 
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of 
landscaping for the required setback distance, 
including pathways as appropriate, as ap­
proved by the design review board, shall be 
provided between dissimilar uses or other 
districts. 
f. Open Space Density Bonus 
Provision of common open space totaling 
not less than twenty percent of the net site 
area, shall entitle the developer to observe the 
property development standards (except 
minimum development area) and the setback 
regulations of the next less restrictive residen­
tial district. (Ord. 04-91 § I (part)) 
15.04 Height Regulations 
The height of all structures shall not exceed 
one story nor twenty-five feet in height; or if 
accepted as part of a development plan at the 
time of zoning approval, two stories or thirty­
five feet. 
15.05 Setback Regulations 
Unless otherwise accepted as part of a de­
velopment plan at the time of zoning ap­
proval, the following setbacks shall be pro­
vided: 
a. Front Yard 
I. There shall be a front yard having a 
depth of not less than ten feet. 
2. Where a lot is located at the intersec­
tion of two or more streets, there shall be a 
yard conforming to the front yard require­
ments on each street side of a corner lot. 
No accessory building shall project into 
yards required to conform with the front 
yard requirements. 
b. Side Yard 
There shall be a side yard on each side of a 
building having a width of not less than ten 
feet. 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I. 6-05) 
===PAGE 75===
c. RearYard 
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of 
not less than ten feet. 
15.06 Additional Regulations 
a. Any exterior lighting shall be directed 
downward and away from adjacent property 
in accordance with the city code and this zon­
ing code. See Section 31.15. 
b. Provisions for on-site storm water reten­
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage 
both entering and leaving the property shall be 
as required by the city of Litchfield Park and 
the Maricopa County Flood Control District; 
the procedures for which shall be approved by 
the council. 
15.05 
42 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-0S) 
===PAGE 76===
16.01
43 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 2,  6-07)
SECTION 16
LOW DENSITY MULTIFAMILY 
(MFL) DISTRICT
Subsections:
16.01 Land Use Definition
16.02 Use Regulations
16.03 Property Development 
Standards
16.04 Height Regulations
16.05 Setback Regulations
16.06 Residential Condominium 
Projects
16.07 Additional Regulations
16.08 Violation; Penalty
16.01 Land Use Definition
Low density multifamily (MFL): this zoning
provides for multifamily housing. Dwelling
units in this category shall have livable floor
area as may be approved by the commission
upon submittal of a use plan by the developer.
16.02 Use Regulations
A building or premises shall be used only for
the purposes set forth in the city of Litchfield
Park zoning matrix (Section 28).
16.03 Property Development Standards
a. Development Area
Each development shall have a minimum
area of five acres.
b. Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit
The minimum lot area per dwelling unit
shall be two thousand four hundred square feet
within the development.
c. Coverage
The maximum coverage shall be sixty per-
cent of the development area.
d. Distance Between Buildings
The minimum distance between buildings
on the same lot shall be ten feet.
e. Buffers
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of
landscaping for the required setback distance,
including pathways as appropriate, as approved
by the design review board, shall be provided
between dissimilar uses or other districts.
f. Open Space Density Bonus
Provision of common open space totaling
not less than twenty percent of the net site area
shall entitle the developer to observe the prop-
erty development standards (except minimum
development area) and the setback regulations
of the next less restrictive residential district.
(Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
16.04 Height Regulations
The height of all structures shall not exceed:
two stories, nor thirty-five feet in height.
16.05 Setback Regulations
a. Front Yard
1. There shall be a front yard having a
depth of not less than twenty feet, unless other-
wise approved as a part of a development plan.
2. Where a lot is located at the intersection
of two or more streets, there shall be a yard
conforming to the front yard requirements on
each street side of a corner lot. No accessory
building shall project into yards required to
conform with the front yard requirements.
b. Side Yard
There shall be a side yard on each side of a
building having a width of not less than twenty
feet.
c. Rear Yard
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of
not less than twenty feet.
===PAGE 77===
16.06
44 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 2,  6-07)
16.06 Residential Condominium Projects
In addition to the regulations set forth in this
section, residential condominium projects shall
comply with the following regulations:
a. Compliance with Zoning District Re-
quirements and Subdivision Regulations
Residential condominium projects shall
comply with the requirements of the low den-
sity multifamily district, as such requirements
may be specifically modified by the applicable
rezoning ordinance, if any. Residential condo-
minium projects shall comply with city subdi-
vision regulations.
b. Use of Residential Condominium
Units as Resort Rental Units
Primary condominium units and split-off
units may be used as resort rental units only in
compliance with the requirements of this sub-
section b.
1. Master Agreement with Resort
There shall be a written master agreement
between a resort that includes the resort rental
units in its hotel room inventory and the owner
of the residential condominium unit whereby
the (a) split-off unit, or (b) both the primary
condominium unit and the split-off unit are
authorized to be used as resort rental units. If
the master agreement is terminated or expires,
the use of the split-off unit and primary condo-
minium unit as a resort rental unit shall cease.
The agreement shall provide at a minimum that
a primary condominium unit shall not be used
as a resort rental unit unless the master agree-
ment includes the split-off unit of the residen-
tial condominium unit as a resort rental unit.
Prior to use of any residential condominium
unit as a resort rental unit, the resort shall file
an affidavit of compliance with the city stating
that the resort is in compliance with the
requirements of this subsection b. The use of a
split-off unit or a primary condominium unit as
a resort rental unit is not a lease prohibited by
subsection c.
2. Management Office
There shall be a management office located
in the city that can provide twenty-four-hour
service to the resort rental units.
3. Bed Tax
The bed tax shall be paid on both primary
condominium units and split-off units used as
resort rental units.
4. Kitchens
A split-off unit shall not include built-in
cooking facilities and shall not be equipped for
kitchen appliances requiring two-hundred-
twenty-volt electric service or natural gas.
5. Parking
Parking shall be provided at a ratio of two
spaces for each condominium unit.
c. No Leasing or Conveyance of Split-
Off Units
Split-off units shall not be leased, subleased
or otherwise conveyed separate from the pri-
mary condominium unit. (Ord. 06-111 § 1
(part))
16.07 Additional Regulations
a. Any exterior lighting shall be directed
downward and away from adjacent property in
accordance with the city code and this zoning
code. See Section 31.15.
b. Provisions for on-site stormwater reten-
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage
both entering and leaving the property shall be
as required by the city of Litchfield Park and
the Maricopa County Flood Control District,
the procedures for which shall be approved by
the council. (Ord. 06-111 § 1 (part). Formerly
16.06)
16.08 Violation; Penalty
Any person found guilty of violating any
provision of Section 16.06 shall be guilty of a
===PAGE 78===
16.08
44-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 2,  6-07)
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars or by imprison-
ment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that
a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as described in this subsection.
(Ord. 06-111 § 4 (part))
===PAGE 79===
17.01
45 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 2,  6-07)
SECTION 17
MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIFAMILY 
(MFM) DISTRICT
Subsections:
17.01 Land Use Definition
17.02 Use Regulations
17.03 Property Development 
Standards
17.04 Height Regulations
17.05 Setback Regulations
17.06 Residential Condominium 
Projects
17.07 Additional Regulations
17.08 Violation; Penalty
17.01 Land Use Definition
Medium density multifamily (MFM): this
zoning provides for multifamily housing.
Dwelling units in this category shall have liv-
able floor area as may be approved by the com-
mission upon submittal of a use plan by the
developer.
17.02 Use Regulations
A building or premises shall be used only for
the purposes set forth in the city of Litchfield
Park zoning matrix (Section 28).
17.03 Property Development Standards
a. Development Area
Each development shall have a minimum
area of five acres.
b. Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit
The minimum lot area per dwelling unit
shall be two thousand square feet within the
development.
c. Coverage
The maximum coverage shall be sixty per-
cent of the development area.
d. Distance Between Buildings
The minimum distance between buildings
on the same lot shall be ten feet.
e. Buffers
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of
landscaping for the required setback distance,
including pathways as appropriate, as approved
by the design review board, shall be provided
between dissimilar uses or other districts.
f. Open Space Density Bonus
Provision of common open space totaling
not less than twenty percent of the net site area
shall entitle the developer to observe the prop-
erty development standards (except minimum
development area) and the setback regulations
of the next less restrictive residential district.
(Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
17.04 Height Regulations
The height of all structures shall not exceed
the lower of: (a) two habitable stories; (b)
thirty-five feet from natural grade through any
structure cross-section.
17.05 Setback Regulations
a. Front Yard
1. There shall be a front yard having a
depth of not less than twenty-five feet, unless
otherwise approved as a part of a development
plan.
2. Where a lot is located at the intersection
of two or more streets, there shall be a yard
conforming to the front yard requirements on
each street side of a corner lot. No accessory
building shall project into yards required to
conform with the front yard requirements.
b. Side Yard
There shall be a side yard on each side of a
building having a width of not less than twenty-
five feet.
===PAGE 80===
17.06
46 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 2,  6-07)
c. Rear Yard
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of
not less than twenty-five feet.
17.06 Residential Condominium Projects
In addition to the regulations set forth in this
section, residential condominium projects shall
comply with the following regulations:
a. Compliance with Zoning District Re-
quirements and Subdivision Regulations
Residential condominium projects shall
comply with the requirements of the medium
density multifamily district, as such require-
ments may be specifically modified by the
applicable rezoning ordinance, if any. Residen-
tial condominium projects shall comply with
city subdivision regulations.
b. Use of Residential Condominium
Units as Resort Rental Units
Primary condominium units and split-off
units may be used as resort rental units only in
compliance with the requirements of Section
16.06(b).
c. No Leasing or Conveyance of Split-
Off Units
Split-off units shall not be leased, subleased
or otherwise conveyed separate from the pri-
mary condominium unit. (Ord. 06-111 § 1
(part))
17.07 Additional Regulations
a. Any exterior lighting shall be directed
downward and away from adjacent property in
accordance with the city code and this zoning
code. See Section 31.15.
b. Provisions for on-site stormwater reten-
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage
both entering and leaving the property shall be
as required by the city of Litchfield Park and
the Maricopa County Flood Control District,
the procedures for which shall be approved by
the council. (Ord. 06-111 § 1 (part). Formerly
17.06)
17.08 Violation; Penalty
Any person found guilty of violating any
provision of Section 17.06 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars or by imprison-
ment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that
a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as described in this subsection.
(Ord. 06-111 § 4 (part))
===PAGE 81===
18.01
47 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 2,  6-07)
SECTION 18
HIGH DENSITY MULTIFAMILY 
(MFH) DISTRICT
Subsections:
18.01 Land Use Definition
18.02 Use Regulations
18.03 Property Development 
Standards
18.04 Height Regulations
18.05 Setback Regulations
18.06 Residential Condominium 
Projects
18.07 Additional Regulations
18.08 Violation; Penalty
18.01 Land Use Definition
High density multifamily (MFH): this zon-
ing provides for multifamily housing. Dwelling
units in this category shall have livable floor
area as may be approved by the commission
upon submittal of a use plan by the developer.
18.02 Use Regulations
A building or premises shall be used only for
the purposes set forth in the city of Litchfield
Park zoning matrix (Section 28).
18.03 Property Development Standards
a. Development Area
Each development shall have a minimum
area of five acres.
b. Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit
The minimum lot area per dwelling unit
shall be one thousand eight hundred square feet
within the development.
c. Coverage
The maximum coverage shall be sixty per-
cent of the development area.
d. Distance Between Buildings
The minimum distance between buildings
on the same lot shall be ten feet.
e. Buffers
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of
landscaping for the required setback distance,
including pathways as appropriate, as approved
by the design review board, shall be provided
between dissimilar uses or other districts. (Ord.
04-91 § 1 (part))
18.04 Height Regulations
The height of all structures shall not exceed
three stories nor forty feet in height.
18.05 Setback Regulations
a. Front Yard
1. There shall be a front yard having a
depth of not less than thirty feet, unless
approved as a part of a development plan.
2. Where a lot is located at the intersection
of two or more streets, there shall be a yard
conforming to the front yard requirements on
each street side of a corner lot. No accessory
building shall project into yards required to
conform with the front yard requirements.
b. Side Yard
There shall be a side yard on each side of a
building having a width of not less than thirty
feet.
c. Rear Yard
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of
not less than thirty feet.
18.06 Residential Condominium Projects
In addition to the regulations set forth in this
section, residential condominium projects shall
comply with the following regulations:
a. Compliance with Zoning District Re-
quirements and Subdivision Regulations
Residential condominium projects shall
comply with the requirements of the high den-
===PAGE 82===
18.07
48 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 2,  6-07)
sity multifamily district, as such requirements
may be specifically modified by the applicable
rezoning ordinance, if any. Residential condo-
minium projects shall comply with city subdi-
vision regulations.
b. Use of Residential Condominium
Units as Resort Rental Units
Primary condominium units and split-off
units may be used as resort rental units only in
compliance with the requirements of Section
16.06(b).
c. No Leasing or Conveyance of Split-
Off Units
Split-off units shall not be leased, subleased
or otherwise conveyed separate from the pri-
mary condominium unit. (Ord. 06-111 § 1
(part))
18.07 Additional Regulations
a. Any exterior lighting shall be directed
downward and away from adjacent property in
accordance with the city code and this zoning
code. See Section 31.15.
b. Provisions for on-site stormwater reten-
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage
both entering and leaving the property shall be
as required by the city of Litchfield Park and
the Maricopa County Flood Control District,
the procedures for which shall be approved by
the council. (Ord. 06-111 § 1 (part). Formerly
18.06)
18.08 Violation; Penalty
Any person found guilty of violating any
provision of Sections 18.06 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars or by imprison-
ment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that
a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as described in this subsection.
(Ord. 06-111 § 4 (part))
===PAGE 83===
SECTION 19 
PATIO HOME RESIDENTIAL (PH) 
DISTRICT 
Subsections: 
19.01 Land Use Definition 
19.02 
19.03 
19.04 
19.05 
19.06 
Use Regulations 
Property Development 
Standards 
Height Regulations 
Setback Regulations 
Additional Regulations 
19.01 Land Use Definition 
Patio Home Residential (PH): the principal 
land use is a single-family dwelling on a subdi­
vision lot of four thousand square feet in area. 
Each residence must have a minimum livable 
floor area of one thousand square feet. 
19.02 Use Regulations 
A building or premises shall be used only 
for the purposes set forth in the city of Litch­
field Park zoning matrix (Section 28). 
19.03 Property Development Standards 
Unless otherwise accepted as part of a de­
velopment plan at the time of zoning approval, 
the following development standards shall be 
provided: 
a. Development Area 
Each development shall have a minimum 
area of two acres. 
b. LotArea 
In the patio home residential district, every 
residential lot shall have an area of not less 
than four thousand square feet, and width of 
not less than forty feet. 
49 
19.01 
c. Minimum Unit Size 
No residence shall have a livable floor area 
of less than one thousand square feet. 
d. Coverage 
The maximum coverage shall be sixty per­
cent of the development area. 
e. Distance Between Buildings 
The minimum distance between buildings 
on the same lot shall be ten feet. 
f. Buffers 
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of 
landscaping for the required setback distance, 
including pathways as appropriate, as approved 
by the design review board, shall be provided 
between dissimilar uses or other districts. 
19.04 Height Regulations 
No building shall exceed one story nor 
twenty-five feet in height, or if accepted as part 
of a development plan at the time of the zoning 
approval, two stories or thirty-five feet. 
19.05 Setback Regulations 
a. Front Yard 
1. There shall be a front yard having a 
depth of not less than ten feet, unless approved 
as a part of a development plan. 
2. Where a lot is located at the intersection 
of two or more streets, there shall he a yard 
conforming to the front yard requirements on 
each street side of a comer lot. No accessory 
building shall project into yards required to 
conform with the front yard requirements. 
b. Side Yard 
The combined side yard for any two adja­
cent lots shall equal ten feet, in any combina­
tion, from zero feet for one lot and ten feet for 
the other, to five feet for each lot. In any case, 
no two adjacent buildings on separate lots 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 84===
shall have a combined side lot dimension of 
less than ten feet 
c. Rear Yard 
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of 
not less than ten feet. 
19.06 Additional Regulations 
a. Any exterior lighting shall be directed 
downward and away from adjacent property in 
accordance with the city code and this zoning 
code. See section 31.15. 
b. Provisions for on-site stormwater reten­
tion/drainage and off-site storm water drainage 
both entering and leaving the property shall be 
as required by the city of Litchfield Park and 
the Maricopa County Flood Control District; 
the procedures for which shall be approved by 
the council. 
19.05 
50 
===PAGE 85===
20.01
51 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 2,  6-07)
SECTION 20
RESORT (RT) DISTRICT
Subsections:
20.01 Land Use Definition
20.02 Use Regulations
20.03 Property Development 
Standards
20.04 Additional Regulations
* Editor’s Note: § 20.05 was repealed by Ord. 06-111.
20.01 Land Use Definition
Resort: this category provides commercial
hospitality lodgings in spacious settings that
are principally intended for vacationing, relax-
ation and conference activities for visitors to
the community.
Permitted are tourist lodgings such as hotels
or motels, with commonly incidental, recre-
ation-oriented uses, including golf courses,
horseback riding, swimming, tennis, and other
similar outdoor activities; as well as facilities
contained within the principal resort building:
restaurants, cocktail lounges, car rental, health
clubs, childcare, professional business offices,
and convention services.
Other accessory or temporary uses: fraternal
or civic clubs, freestanding commercial recre-
ation (including stables), retail shops, or finan-
cial institutions and any manufactured
structures require use permit approval. (Ord.
06-111 § 1 (part))
20.02 Use Regulations
Buildings or premises shall be used only for
the purposes as set forth in the city of Litchfield
Park zoning matrix (Section 28).
20.03 Property Development Standards
a. Development Area
Each development shall have a minimum
area of ten acres. The resort development must
provide a minimum of four thousand square
feet of area for each lodging unit.
b. Development Width
The minimum development width shall be
three hundred feet.
c. Coverage
The maximum coverage shall be sixty per-
cent of the development area.
d. Buffers
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of
landscaping for the required setback distance,
including pathways as appropriate, as approved
by the design review board, shall be provided
between dissimilar uses or other districts. (Ord.
04-91 § 1 (part))
20.04 Additional Regulations
a. All activity (except required on-site
parking, loading or unloading) including inci-
dental or accessory storage and display area
shall be within a completely enclosed building,
unless specifically noted herein. Use permit
approval shall be required for any intensifica-
tion, expansion or alteration of uses, conditions
or buildings including, but not limited to, golf
course maintenance facilities.
b. Any exterior lighting shall be directed
downward and away from adjacent property in
accordance with the city code and this zoning
code. See Section 31.15.
c. Provisions for on-site stormwater reten-
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage
both entering and leaving the property shall be
as required by the city and the Maricopa
County Flood Control District, the procedures
for which shall be approved by the council.
===PAGE 86===
21.01
52 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 13,  2-13)
SECTION 21
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC) 
DISTRICT
Subsections:
21.01 Land Use Definition
21.02 Use Regulations
21.03 Property Development 
Standards
21.04 Height Regulations
21.05 Setback Regulations
21.06 Additional Regulations
21.01 Land Use Definition
Neighborhood commercial: this category
provides areas for comm ercial centers located
within close proximity to residential neighbor-
hoods which provide everyday goods and ser-
vices. The neighborhood commercial area
should be located conven ient to the neighbor-
hood(s) it serves.
Permitted are professional/business offices,
retail and service shops, child care, community
facilities, financial institutions, government
facilities, information center, restaurants, and
health clubs.
Accessory uses, temporary uses, churches,
clinics, cocktail lounges, fraternal or civic
clubs, arcades and game centers, auto service
stations, department stores, equipment rental,
commercial recreation, convenience stores,
miniwarehousing, schools, supermarkets,
rental cars, research and development, vehicle
repair or storage, veterinary services, and any
manufactured structures require use permit
approval. (Ord. 13-183 § 1 (part))
21.02 Use Regulations
A building or premises shall be used only for
the purposes as set forth in the city of Litchfield
Park zoning matrix (Section 28).
21.03 Property Development Standards
a. Development Area
Each development shall have a minimum
area of two acres.
b. Lot Width
Not applicable.
c. Coverage
The maximum coverage shall be sixty per-
cent of the development area.
d. Distance Between Buildings
The minimum distance between buildings
on the same lot shall be ten feet.
e. Buffers
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of
landscaping for the required setback distance,
including pathways as appropriate, as approved
by the design review board, shall be provided
between dissimilar uses or other districts.
f. Site Plan Review
Development plans shall be submitted for
approval by the design review board in accor-
dance with the provisions of Section 37 of this
code. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
21.04 Height Regulations
The height of buildings shall not exceed
thirty feet above grade nor two stories, except
that the height of any building or structure
closer than thirty feet to a rural or residential
zone or structure shall not exceed fifteen feet
above grade nor one story. Streets and alleys
may be included in calculating the distance.
===PAGE 87===
21.05
53 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 12,  11-12)
21.05 Setback Regulations
a. Front Yard
1. There shall be a front yard having a
depth of not less than fifty feet unless approved
as a part of a development plan.
2. Where a lot is located at the intersection
of two or more streets, there shall be a yard
conforming to the front yard requirements on
each street side of a corner lot. No accessory
building shall project into yards required to
conform with the front yard requirements.
b. Side Yard
None required, except that:
1. Where a lot is adjacent to a residential
zoning district there shall be a side yard on the
side of the lot adjacent to such residential zon-
ing district having a width of no less than fifty
feet.
2. Where a lot fronts on two streets there
shall be a side yard on the street side of such
corner lot having a width of no less than thirty
feet.
3. If a side yard is otherwise provided it
shall have a width of not less than thirty feet.
c. Rear Yard
None required, except that:
1. Where a lot abuts a residential zoning
district whether or not separated by an alley,
there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not
less than fifty feet.
2. If a rear yard is otherwise provided it
shall have a depth of not less than thirty feet.
21.06 Additional Regulations
a. Any exterior lightin g shall be directed
downward and away from adjacent property in
accordance with the city code and this zoning
code. See Section 31.15.
b. Provisions for on-site stormwater reten-
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage
both entering and leaving the property shall be
as required by the city, and the Maricopa
County flood control district, the procedures
for which shall be approved by the council.
c. Commercial signage shall comply with
the requirements of Litchfield Park sign stan-
dards set forth in Section 35.31(b).
d. When an application for site plan
approval pursuant to Section 37 of this zoning
code or minor land division or preliminary plat
approval pursuant to Chapter 14 of the city
code does not include all of the parcel(s)
included in the adopted rezoning ordinance for
the parcel(s), a master development plan shall
be submitted that complies with this subsec-
tion. Such site plan, minor land division or pre-
liminary plat shall not be approved except in
conformance with this subsection. The plan-
ning and zoning commission shall review the
master development plan and forward a recom-
mendation to the council. The council may
approve or deny the master development plan.  
1. The master development plan shall
encompass all of the parcel(s) that were
rezoned pursuant to one zoning ordinance.  
2. The design and development of the par-
cel(s) in the master development plan shall be
consistent architecturally and materials and
colors shall be harmonious.
3. The master development plan shall be
comprehensive, embraci ng land, buildings,
landscaping and their interrelationships.
4. The master development plan shall pro-
vide for circulation, off-street parking, drain-
age and related amenities. Buildings,
structures and facilities in the parcel(s) shall be
integrated, oriented and related to the topo-
graphic and natural landscape features of the
site.
5. Circulation patterns on the parcel(s)
shall be compatible w ith circulation patterns
on adjoining properties.
===PAGE 88===
21.06
53-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 12,  11-12)
6. The internal street system shall not be a
dominant feature in the overall design; rather,
it should be designed for the efficient and safe
flow of vehicles without creating a disruptive
influence on the activity and function of any
common areas and facilities. (Ord. 12-178 § 1
(part); Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
===PAGE 89===
SECTION 22 
COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (CS) 
DISTRICT 
Subsections: 
22.01 Land Use Definition 
22.02 Use Regulations 
22.03 Property Development 
Standards 
22.04 
22.05 
22.06 
Height Regulations 
Setback Regulations 
Additional Regulations 
22.01 Land Use Definition 
Community commercial: this category pro­
vides areas for commercial centers which pro­
vide everyday goods and services for a num­
ber of neighborhoods. The community com­
mercial area should be located convenient to 
several neighborhoods and be accessed by 
major arterial streets. 
All uses permitted in the neighborhood 
commercial district and, in addition, arcades 
and game centers, auto service stations, cock­
tail lounges, car washes, churches, clinics, 
commercial recreation, convention services, 
convenience stores, department stores, frater­
nal or civic clubs, take-out restaurants, super­
markets, car rental and sales, and veterinary 
services are, likewise, permitted. 
Accessory uses, temporary uses, equipment 
rental, service industries, miniwarehousing, 
research and development, schools, vehicle 
repair or storage, and any manufactured struc­
tures require use permit approval. 
22.02 Use Regulations 
A building or premises shall be used only 
for the purposes as set forth in the city of 
Litchfield Park zoning matrix (Section 28). 
54 
22.01 
22.03 Property Development Standards 
a. Lot Area 
Each lot shall have a minimum area of fif­
teen acres. 
b. LotWidth 
Each lot shall have a minimum width of 
one hundred fifty feet. 
c. Lot Coverage 
The maximum lot coverage shall be sixty 
percent of the lot area. 
d. Buffers 
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of 
landscaping for the required setback distance, 
including pathways as appropriate, as ap­
proved by the design review board, shall be 
provided between dissimilar uses or other 
districts. 
e. Site Plan Review 
Development plans shall be submitted for 
approval by the design review board in accor­
dance with the provisions of Section 37 of this 
code. (Ord. 04-91 § I (part)) 
22.04 Height Regulations 
The height of buildings shall not exceed 
forty feet above grade nor two stories. 
22.05 Setback Regulations 
a. Front Yard 
I . There shall be a front yard having a 
depth of not less than fifty feet unless ap­
proved as a part of a development plan. 
2. Where a lot is located at the intersec­
tion of two or more streets, there shall be a 
yard conforming to the front yard require­
ments on each street side of a comer lot. No 
accessory building shall project into yards 
required to conform with the front yard re­
quirements. 
b. SideYard 
None required, except that: 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. l, 6-05) 
===PAGE 90===
22.06
55 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 12,  11-12)
1. Where a lot is adjacent to a residential
zoning district there shall be a side yard on the
side of the lot adjacent to such residential zon-
ing district having a width of not less than
thirty feet but at least equal to one foot of set-
back for each one foot of vertical height of the
principal building.
2. Where a lot abuts two streets there shall
be a side yard on the street side of such corner
lot having a width of not less than fifty feet.
3. If a side yard is otherwise provided it
shall have a width of not less than fifty feet.
c. Rear Yard
None required, except that:
1. Where a lot abuts a residential zoning
district whether or not separated by an alley,
there shall be a rear yard having a depth of at
least thirty feet but not less than one foot of set-
back for each one foot of vertical height of the
principal building.
2. If a rear yard is otherwise provided it
shall have a depth of not less than fifty feet.
22.06 Additional Regulations
a. Any exterior lightin g shall be directed
downward and away from adjacent property in
accordance with the city code and this zoning
code. See Section 31.15.
b. Provision of on-site stormwater reten-
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage
both entering and leaving the property shall be
as required by the c ity and the Maricopa
County flood control district, the procedures
for which shall be approved by the council.
c. Commercial signage shall comply with
the requirements of Litchfield Park sign stan-
dards set forth in Section 35.31(a). 
d. When an application for site plan
approval pursuant to Section 37 of this zoning
code or minor land division or preliminary plat
approval pursuant to Chapter 14 of the city
code does not include all of the parcel(s)
included in the adopted rezoning ordinance for
the parcel(s), a master development plan shall
be submitted that complies with this subsec-
tion. Such site plan, minor land division or pre-
liminary plat shall not be approved except in
conformance with this subsection. The plan-
ning and zoning commission shall review the
master development plan and forward a recom-
mendation to the council. The council may
approve or deny the master development plan.  
1. The master development plan shall
encompass all of the parcel(s) that were
rezoned pursuant to one zoning ordinance.  
2. The design and development of the par-
cel(s) in the master development plan shall be
consistent architecturally and materials and
colors shall be harmonious.
3. The master development plan shall be
comprehensive, embraci ng land, buildings,
landscaping and their interrelationships.
4. The master development plan shall pro-
vide for circulation, off-street parking, drain-
age and related amenities. Buildings,
structures and facilities in the parcel(s) shall be
integrated, oriented and related to the topo-
graphic and natural landscape features of the
site.
5. Circulation patterns on the parcel(s)
shall be compatible w ith circulation patterns
on adjoining properties.
6. The internal street system shall not be a
dominant feature in the overall design; rather,
it should be designed for the efficient and safe
flow of vehicles without creating a disruptive
influence on the activity and function of any
common areas and facilities. (Ord. 12-178 § 1
(part); Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
===PAGE 91===
SECTION23 
REGIONAL COMMERCIAL (RS) 
DISTRICT 
Subsections: 
23.01 Land Use Definition 
23.02 Use Regulations 
23.03 Property Development 
Standards 
23.04 
23.05 
23.06 
Height Regulations 
Setback Regulations 
Additional Regulations 
23.01 Land Use Definition 
Regional commercial: this category pro­
vides areas for commercial centers to provide 
a variety of everyday goods and services for a 
widely dispersed area. The regional commer­
cial district should be located convenient to 
several cities or communities and be accessed 
by major arterial streets or highways. 
All uses permitted in the community com­
mercial district, with the exception of fraternal 
or civic clubs, which require use permit ap­
proval are, likewise, permitted. 
Uses requiring use permit approval in the 
community commercial district, with the addi­
tion of heliports, truck terminals, and fraternal 
or civic clubs, require use permit approval. 
23.02 Use Regulations 
A building or premises shall be used only 
for the purposes as set forth in the city of 
Litchfield Park zoning matrix (Section 28). 
23.03 Property Development Standards 
a. LotArea 
Each lot shall have a minimum area of 
thirty acres. 
56 
23.01 
b. LotWidth 
Each lot shall have a minimum width of 
three hundred feet. 
c. Lot Coverage 
The maximum lot coverage shall be sixty 
percent of the lot area. 
d. Buffers 
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of 
landscaping for the required setback distance, 
including pathways as appropriate, as ap­
proved by the design review board, shall be 
provided between dissimilar uses or other 
districts. 
e. Site Plan Review 
Development plans shall be submitted for 
approval by the design review board in accor­
dance with the provisions of Section 37 of this 
code. (Ord. 04-91 § I (part)) 
23.04 Height Regulations 
The height of buildings shall not exceed 
eighty feet above grade nor eight stories. 
23.05 Setback Regulations 
a. Front Yard 
I . There shall be a front yard having a 
depth of not less than eighty feet unless ap­
proved as a part of a development plan. 
2. Where a lot is located at the intersec­
tion of two or more streets, there shall be a 
yard conforming to the front yard require­
ments on each street side of a comer lot. No 
accessory building shall project into yards 
required to conform with the front yard re­
quirements. 
b. Side Yard 
None required, except that: 
1. Where a lot is adjacent to a residential 
zoning district there shall be a side yard on the 
side of the lot adjacent to such residential zon­
ing district having a width of not less than one 
hundred feet. 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 92===
23.06
57 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 12,  11-12)
2. Where a lot abuts two streets there shall
be a side yard on the street side of such corner
lot having a width of not less than eighty feet.
3. If a side yard is otherwise provided it
shall have a width of not less than eighty feet.
c. Rear Yard
Not required, except that:
1. Where a lot abuts a residential zoning
district whether or not separated by an alley,
there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not
less than one hundred feet.
2. If a rear yard is otherwise provided it
shall have a depth of not less than eighty feet.
23.06 Additional Regulations
a. Any exterior lightin g shall be directed
downward and away from adjacent property in
accordance with the city code and this zoning
code. See Section 31.15.
b. Provisions for on-site stormwater reten-
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage
both entering and leaving the property shall be
as required by the c ity and the Maricopa
County flood control district, the procedures
for which shall be approved by the council.
c. Commercial signage shall comply with
the requirements of Litchfield Park sign stan-
dards set forth in Section 35.31(a).
d. When an application for site plan
approval pursuant to Section 37 of this zoning
code or minor land division or preliminary plat
approval pursuant to Chapter 14 of the city
code does not include all of the parcel(s)
included in the adopted rezoning ordinance for
the parcel(s), a master development plan shall
be submitted that complies with this subsec-
tion. Such site plan, minor land division or pre-
liminary plat shall not be approved except in
conformance with this subsection. The plan-
ning and zoning commission shall review the
master development plan and forward a recom-
mendation to the council. The council may
approve or deny the master development plan.  
1. The master development plan shall
encompass all of the parcel(s) that were
rezoned pursuant to one zoning ordinance.  
2. The design and development of the par-
cel(s) in the master development plan shall be
consistent architecturally and materials and
colors shall be harmonious.
3. The master development plan shall be
comprehensive, embraci ng land, buildings,
landscaping and their interrelationships.
4. The master development plan shall pro-
vide for circulation, off-street parking, drain-
age and related amenities. Buildings,
structures and facilities in the parcel(s) shall be
integrated, oriented and related to the topo-
graphic and natural landscape features of the
site.
5. Circulation patterns on the parcel(s)
shall be compatible w ith circulation patterns
on adjoining properties.
6. The internal street system shall not be a
dominant feature in the overall design; rather,
it should be designed for the efficient and safe
flow of vehicles without creating a disruptive
influence on the activity and function of any
common areas and facilities. (Ord. 12-178 § 1
(part); Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
===PAGE 93===
SECTION24 
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (I) DISTRICT 
Subsections: 
24.01 Land Use Definition 
24.02 
24.03 
24.04 
24.05 
24.06 
Use Regulations 
Property Development 
Standards 
Height Regulations 
Setback Regulations 
Additional Regulations 
24.01 Land Use Definition 
General industrial: this land use category 
applies to areas for industrial structures and 
uses having physical and operational charac­
teristics which are neither offensive, hazard­
ous, or which otherwise adversely affect the 
economic welfare of nearby residential and 
commercial uses. 
All uses permitted in the regional commer­
cial district, with the exception of retail and 
service uses, child care, cocktail lounges, and 
convention and government services, which 
require use permit approval; and clinics which 
are prohibited; and, in addition, equipment 
rental, heliports, construction industry, service 
industry, kennels, miniwarehousing, plant 
nurseries, research and development, truck 
terminals, and vehicle storage are permitted. 
Uses requiring use permit approval in the 
regional commercial district, except for those 
permitted, and, as noted, cocktail lounges, 
child care, convention and government ser­
vices, retail and service and, in addition, hos­
pitals, and solid waste stations require use 
permit approval. 
58 
24.01 
24.02 Use Regulations 
A building or premises shall be used only 
for the purposes set forth in the city of Litch­
field Park zoning matrix (Section 28). 
24.03 Property Development Standards 
a. Lot Area 
Each lot shall have a minimum area of forty 
acres. 
b. LotWidth 
Each lot shall have a minimum width of 
three hundred feet. 
c. Lot Coverage 
The maximum lot coverage shall be sixty 
percent of the lot area. 
d. Buffers 
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of 
landscaping for the required setback distance, 
including pathways as appropriate, as ap­
proved by the design review board, shall be 
provided between dissimilar uses or other 
districts. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part)) 
24.04 Height Regulations 
The height of buildings shall not exceed 
fifty feet above grade nor three stories. 
24.05 Setback Regulations 
a. Front Yard 
1 . There shall be a front yard having a 
depth of not less than one hundred feet, unless 
approved as a part of a development plan. 
2. Where a lot is located at the intersec­
tion of two or more streets, there shall be a 
yard conforming to the front yard require­
ments on each street side of a corner lot. No 
accessory building shall project into yards 
required to conform with the front yard re­
quirements. 
b. Side Yard 
None required, except that: 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 1. 6-05) 
===PAGE 94===
24.06
59 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 12,  11-12)
1. Where a lot is adjacent to a residential
zoning district there shall be side yard on the
side of the lot adjacent to such residential zon-
ing district having a width of not less than one
hundred feet.
2. Where a corner lot abuts two streets
there shall be a side yard on the street side of
such corner lot having a width of not less than
one hundred feet.
3. If a side yard is otherwise provided it
shall have a width of not less than one hundred
feet.
c. Rear Yard
None required, except that:
1. Where a lot abuts a residential zoning
district whether or not separated by an alley,
there shall be rear yard having a depth of not
less than one hundred feet.
2. If a rear yard is otherwise provided it
shall have a depth of not less than one hundred
feet.
24.06 Additional Regulations
a. Any exterior lightin g shall be directed
downward and away from adjacent property in
accordance with the city code and this zoning
code. See Section 31.15.
b. Provisions for on-site stormwater reten-
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage
both entering and leaving the property shall be
as required by the c ity and the Maricopa
County flood control district, the procedures
for which shall be approved by the council.
c. When an application for site plan
approval pursuant to Section 37 of this zoning
code or minor land division or preliminary plat
approval pursuant to Chapter 14 of the city
code does not include all of the parcel(s)
included in the adopted rezoning ordinance for
the parcel(s), a master development plan shall
be submitted that complies with this subsec-
tion. Such site plan, minor land division or pre-
liminary plat shall not be approved except in
conformance with this subsection. The plan-
ning and zoning commission shall review the
master development plan and forward a recom-
mendation to the council. The council may
approve or deny the master development plan.  
1. The master development plan shall
encompass all of the parcel(s) that were
rezoned pursuant to one zoning ordinance.  
2. The design and development of the par-
cel(s) in the master development plan shall be
consistent architecturally and materials and
colors shall be harmonious.
3. The master development plan shall be
comprehensive, embraci ng land, buildings,
landscaping and their interrelationships.
4. The master development plan shall pro-
vide for circulation, off-street parking, drain-
age and related amenities. Buildings, structures
and facilities in the parcel(s) shall be inte-
grated, oriented and related to the topographic
and natural landscape features of the site.
5. Circulation patterns on the parcel(s)
shall be compatible with circulation patterns on
adjoining properties.
6. The internal street system shall not be a
dominant feature in the overall design; rather,
it should be designed for the efficient and safe
flow of vehicles without creating a disruptive
influence on the activity and function of any
common areas and facilities. (Ord. 12-178 § 1
(part))
===PAGE 95===
SECTION25 
OPEN SP ACE (OS) DISTRICT 
Subsections: 
25.01 Land Use Definition 
25.02 Use Regulations 
25.03 Additional Regulations 
25.04 District Changes and 
Rezoning 
25.01 Land Use Definition 
Open space: this category applies to open 
space areas such as agricultural land, green­
belt, parks, golf courses, and other areas to be 
preserved as open space. Commercial recrea­
tion, cemeteries/mausoleums, golf courses, 
farms and resort-related open space are uses 
permitted. 
Accessory uses, temporary uses, churches, 
community or government facilities, health 
clubs, plant nurseries, stables and any manufac­
tured structures require use permit approval. 
25.02 Use Regulations 
Buildings and premises are only to be used 
for the purposes as defined in the city of 
Litchfield Park zoning matrix (Section 28). 
25.03 Additional Regulations 
a. Any exterior lighting shall be directed 
downward and away from adjacent property 
in accordance with the city code and this zon­
ing code. See Section 31.15. 
b. Provisions for on-site stormwaterreten­
tion/drainage and off-site stormwaterdrainage 
both entering and leaving the property shall be 
as required by the city and the Maricopa 
County Flood Control District; the procedures 
for which shall be approved by the council. 
60 
25.01 
25.04 District Changes and Rezoning 
Requests for changes to, or the rezoning 
of, lands within the open space district shall 
require: 
a. Special Hearings 
I. A public hearing of the commission 
to consider only applications for changes to 
and/or amendment of open space designa­
tions; and 
2. A special public hearing of the council 
for the sole purpose of considering commis­
sion recommendations regarding applica­
tion(s) for changes to and/or amendment of 
open space designations. 
b. Special Notice 
l. Publication in a local newspaper of 
general circulation of a notice, of not less than 
one-eighth page, of the time, date and place of 
special hearings on proposed open space dis­
trict changes and/or amendments; 
2. Posted notice of the time, date and 
place of special hearings on requested changes 
to and/or amendments of open space designa­
tions on the subject property; and 
3. Mailed notice to the owner of record of 
properties within three hundred feet of the 
subject property. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part)) 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 96===
SECTION26 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) 
DISTRICT 
Subsections: 
26.01 Land Use Definition 
26.02 
26.03 
26.04 . 
Application Requirements 
Design Criteria and 
Development Standards 
Property Development 
Standards Modification 
Procedure 
26.01 Land Use Definition 
A planned development is a development 
improved in accordance with an overall pro­
ject plan. The approved density and land use 
regulations shall be applied to the total area of 
the planned development rather than sepa­
rately to individual lots. The planned devel­
opment district is an overlay district, com­
bined with one or more underlying district 
designations. The planned development over­
lay will only be granted for parcels of forty 
acres or more unless an exception is obtained 
from the council. 
Planned developments should, and are en­
couraged to, include business uses which con­
tribute to neighborhood quality and conven­
ience as well as the community economy. Site 
planning techniques are applied to integrate 
establishments providing goods, services, lei­
sure activities and jobs that are easily accessi­
ble to nearby residents. 
Zoning in growth areas designated in the 
city of Litchfield Park general plan shall be 
planned development districts with appropri­
ate buffering treatment for the integration of 
adjacent uses. 
Existing planned developments contain the 
uses and are maintained to the specific condi-
61 
26.01 
tions of development set forth in their respec­
tive plans of development or covenants, 
codes and restrictions (CC&Rs). Alterations, 
expansions, additions, or intensification of 
uses (including, but not limited to, requests 
for home occupation) beyond that which is 
permitted in the most comparable zoning dis­
trict which may have been assigned to the 
existing planned development, require use 
permit approval. 
Requests for planned development district 
designation may be approved in accord with a 
conceptual plan of development describing the 
intended use and intensity of development. 
However, no building permits shall be issued 
unless and until specific zoning district classi­
fications, as herein described, are approved 
and affixed by the council upon the planned 
development or portion thereof for which such 
permits are intended. (Ord. 04-91 § I (part)) 
26.02 Application Requirements 
Applications for planned development shall 
specify the intended, underlying zoning dis­
trict or districts, with the presumption that the 
nearest similar use regulations or other regula­
tory provision shall apply except as specifi­
cally adjusted for the particular development, 
such as, but not limited to, reduced lot sizes or 
setbacks. 
The application shall be accompanied by a 
development plan which shall consist of: 
a. A map or maps drawn to a suitable 
scale, showing at least the following: 
1. The boundary of the proposed district; 
2. The topographic character of the land; 
3. Drainage accommodations; 
4. Accommodations for all utilities; 
5. Proposed streetscape themes, landscap­
ing plans for common open space and land­
scape materials palette; 
(Litchfield Par!< Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 97===
26.03
62 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 4,  2-08)
6. The approximate location of all public
streets;
7. Location of public uses proposed, such
as schools, parks, playgrounds, bicycle and
equestrian trails, or other recreational facili-
ties;
8. Where appropriate, the approximate
location and configuration of different types or
densities of dwelling units;
9. Where appropriate, said plan shall
include recommendations as to desirable or
compatible uses in the areas surrounding said
development;
10. Within the planned development, units
may be established of any size whatever but
shall be logical in size and shape and shall
function by themselves and in relationship to
other development units within the community
or adjacent property.
11. An agreement to waive claims for dim-
inution in value as set forth in Section 3.07.
b. A development program including:
1. A legal description of the district
boundary;
2. Size of the area;
3. The overall density proposed;
4. The nature of development proposed;
5. The disposition of land proposed for
public facilities and common open space con-
stituting not less than ten percent of the net site
or lot area unless otherwise modified by city
council;
6. A phasing schedule, if the applicant
contemplated construction in increments;
7. The approximate size, in acres, of each
development unit;
8. General landscaping and street tree
plan, including attention to efficient water use.
c. All proposed restrictive covenants.
d. All conditions agreed to by the applicant
which are not included in the written documen-
tation required under subsections a, b, and c of
this section are part of the development plan.
(Ord. 07-134 § 1 (part); Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
26.03 Design Criteria and Development 
Standards
a. Design Criteria
The planned development shall observe the
following design criteria:
1. The overall plan shall be comprehen-
sive, embracing land, buildings, landscaping
and their interrelationships and shall conform
in all respects to all adopted plans of all gov-
ernmental agencies for the area in which the
proposed development is located.
2. The plan shall provide for adequate
open space, circulation including pathway
connections, off-street parking, and pertinent
amenities. Buildings, structures and facilities
in the parcel shall be well integrated, oriented
and related to the topographic and natural land-
scape features of the site.
3. The proposed development shall be
compatible with existing and planned land use,
and with circulation patterns on adjoining
properties. It shall not constitute a disruptive
element to the neighborhood and community.
4. The internal street system shall not be a
dominant feature in the overall design, rather it
should be designed for the efficient and safe
flow of vehicles without creating a disruptive
influence on the activity and function of any
common areas and facilities.
5. Common areas and recreational facili-
ties shall be so located so as to be readily
accessible to the occupants of the dwelling
units and shall be well related to any common
open spaces provided.
6. Architectural harmony within the
development and within the neighborhood and
community shall be obtained so far as practica-
ble.
===PAGE 98===
26.04
63 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 4,  2-08)
b. Property Development Standards
1. All structures or buildings, except
detached single-family residences, shall have
design review approval.
2. Any use requiring a use permit must be
obtained prior to approval of the PD.
3. All provisions of the zoning code shall
apply to development in the PD district except
as specifically permitted in this section.
4. All structures built within the district
shall, as a requirement for a building permit,
indicate on the structural plans the manner in
which all mechanical equipment is to be
screened.
5. Allowable signage and requirements
vary by size of development. (See Sections
35.31 and 35.32) (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
26.04 Property Development Standards 
Modification Procedure
The application shall be accompanied by
written terminology and graphic material, and
will illustrate the conditions that the modified
standards will produce, so as to enable the com-
mission and the council to make the determina-
tion that the modification will produce a living
environment, landscape quality and lifestyle
superior to that produced by the existing stan-
dards.
===PAGE 99===
27.01
64 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 18, 5-16)
SECTION 27
PUBLIC FACILITIES (PF) DISTRICT
Subsections:
27.01 Land Use Definition
27.02 Use Regulations
27.03 Property Development 
Standards
27.04 Height Regulations
27.05 Setback Regulations
27.06 Additional Regulations
27.07 Continuum of Care 
Developments
27.01 Land Use Definition
Public facilities: th is land use category
applies to areas for churches, schools, hospi-
tals, continuum of care developments, govern-
ment buildings, and utility facilities which,
together with convention services, child care
and information centers, are permitted.
Accessory uses, temporary uses, arcades and
game centers, cemeteries/mausoleums, clinics,
commercial recreation, convalescent homes,
outdoor farmers markets, fraternal or civic
clubs, health clubs, plant nurseries, profes-
sional/business offices, solid waste stations,
stables, veterinary services, and manufactured
structures require use permit approval. (Ord.
16-211 § 1 (part); Ord. 01-74 § 1 (part))
27.02 Use Regulations
Buildings and premises shall only be used
for the purposes as defined in the city of Litch-
field Park zoning matrix (Section 28).
27.03 Property Development Standards
a. Lot Area
Not Applicable.
b. Lot Width
Each lot shall have a minimum width of
sixty feet.
c. Lot Coverage
The maximum lot coverage shall be sixty
percent of the lot area.
d. Buffers
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of
landscaping for the required setback distance,
including pathways as appropriate, as approved
by the design review board, shall be provided
between dissimilar uses or other districts. (Ord.
04-91 § 1 (part))
27.04 Height Regulations
The height of buildings shall not exceed
forty-five feet above grade nor three stories,
except that the height of any church tower or
steeple may not exceed sixty feet.
27.05 Setback Regulations
a. Front Yard
A minimum front yard of twenty feet is
required in the PF district.
b. Side Yard
None required, except that:
1. Where a lot is adjacent to a rural or res-
idential zoning district there shall be a side
yard on the side of the lot adjacent to such rural
or residential zoning district having a width of
not less than thirty feet.
2. Where a corner lot abuts two streets
there shall be a side yard on the street side of
such corner lot having a width of not less than
twenty feet.
3. If a side yard is otherwise provided it
shall have a width of not less than twenty feet.
c. Rear Yard
None required, except that:
1. Where a lot abuts a rural or residential
zoning district whether or not separated by an
===PAGE 100===
27.05
64-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 18, 5-16)
alley, there shall be a rear yard having a depth
of not less than thirty feet.
2. If a rear yard is otherwise provided it
shall have a depth of not less than twenty feet.
===PAGE 101===
27.06 Additional Regulations 
a. All activity ( except required on-site 
parking, loading or unloading) excluding inci­
dental or accessory storage and display area 
shall be within a completely enclosed build­
ing, unless specifically noted herein. 
b. Any exterior lighting shall be directed 
downward and away from adjacent property 
in accordance with the city code and this zon­
ing code. See Section 31.15. 
c. Provisions for on-site storm water reten­
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage 
both entering and leaving the property shall be 
as required by the city and the Maricopa 
County Flood Control District; the procedures 
for which shall be approved by the council. 
27 .07 Continuum of Care Developments 
a. Purpose 
A continuum of care development provides 
a variety of health related services, including 
independent living facilities, with only the 
minimum of health care related services pro­
vided, to skilled nursing facilities with a wide 
range of health care related services provided. 
A continuum of care development is neither 
strictly residential nor strictly commercial, but 
is a blend ofland uses within a single coordi­
nated campus setting of not less than twenty 
acres. The purpose of this section is to regu­
late continuum of care development in order 
to provide additional land use and property 
development regulations for continuum of 
care developments in public facility districts 
within the city of Litchfield Park. 
b. Definitions 
The following terms shall have the mean­
ings indicated when used in this section: 
1. Continuum of Care Development 
Any coordinated development in which an 
individual is provided a living environment 
with some level of health related service. 
65 
27.06 
These shall include, but are not limited to, 
independent housing facilities; congregate 
care facilities, assisted living facilities, de­
mentia care facilities, skilled nursing facilities 
and supporting facilities. 
2. Independent Housing Facility A fa­
cility where a minimum of health care related 
services are provided. 
3. Congregate Care Facility A facility 
for age restricted individuals where the level 
of service includes some meals and house­
keeping. 
4. Assisted Living Facility A facility for 
individuals, which includes meals and house­
keeping and some level of assistance with ac­
tivities of daily living. 
5. Dementia Care Facility A facility for 
individuals, which includes meals, house­
keeping, assistance with activities of daily 
living and provides some level of assistance 
to those suffering from some form of mem­
ory impairment. 
6. Skilled Nursing Facility A facility for 
individuals who require twenty-four-hour 
health care related services. 
7. Supporting Facilities A subordinate 
use which provides support for, or conven­
ience to, continuum of care developments, 
including by example but not limited to, 
medical/professional offices, pharmaceutical, 
urgent care, primary care and acute care facili­
ties, ambulatory, diagnostic and treatment fa­
cilities, medical laboratories, outpatient facili­
ties, personal care businesses, banks, and 
neighborhood markets. Supporting facilities 
shall be integrated into the design and func­
tion of the continuum of care development 
and shall be open for and may be used by 
members of the general public. 
c. Application Requirements 
In addition to application requirements con­
tained elsewhere in this code, an application 
(Lilchfield Paik Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 102===
--------- -------------------------~ 
for a continuum of care development shall be 
accompanied by a development plan that shall 
be reviewed by the planning and zoning 
commission, who shall forward their written 
recommendations to the city council. The de­
velopment plan shall be approved by the city 
council as part of approval of the zoning ap­
plication and incorporated therein. 
d. Land Use and Operational Regula­
tions 
1. Property Development Regulations 
Continuum of care development shall 
comply with the requirements of the public 
facility district, except that a planned devel­
opment (PD) overlay may include supple­
mental requirements and standards as therein 
specified. 
2. Location of Sales Office 
A sales office for a continuum of care de­
velopment may be located temporarily in a 
modular building or other temporary facility. 
This temporary facility shall be subject to ap­
proval of the design review board and the is­
suance of a use permit by the city council. 
Prior to approving any use permit, the plan­
ning and zoning commission shall hold a pub­
lic hearing and submit its written recommeµ­
dation to the city council. Once units have 
been completed on site and a certificate of 
occupancy for such units has been issued, the 
sales center may be located in one or more of 
the units or clubhouse. (Ord. 01-74 § l (part)) 
27.07 
65-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 1, 6-05) 
===PAGE 103===
27A.01
65-2 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 16,  2-15)
SECTION 27A
AGRITOURISM (AT) DISTRICT
Subsections:
27A.01 Land Use Definition
27A.02 Use Regulations
27A.03 Property Development 
Standards
27A.04 Height Regulations
27A.05 Setback Regulations
27A.06 Additional Regulations
27A.01 Land Use Definition
Agritourism: This ca tegory provides areas
for agritourism uses that encompass multiple
commercial and agricultural enterprises at one
location consistent with the protection of adja-
cent residential uses.
Permitted uses in this district include crop
growing, harvesting, farmers’ markets, farm
stands, general retail and services, plant nurs-
eries, U-pick, tours, on-farm classes, fairs, fes-
tivals, pumpkin patches, Christmas tree farms,
social/corporate events, orchard dinners, youth
camps, barn dances, restaurants, winery,
microbrewery, health spa, and community gar-
den to the extent such uses further the agritour-
ism use.
Accessory uses, temporary uses, farm stays,
bed and breakfasts, hotels, outdoor music,
video broadcasting, beekeeping, and process-
ing/milling/distilling require a use permit.
(Ord. 15-203 § 1 (part))
27A.02 Use Regulations
A building or premises shall be used only for
the purposes as set forth in the City of Litch-
field Park Zoning Matr ix (Section 28). (Ord.
15-203 § 1 (part))
27A.03 Property Development Standards
a. Lot Area
Each lot shall have a minimum area of five
acres.
b. Lot Width
Each lot shall have a minimum width of one
hundred fifty feet.
c. Lot Coverage
The maximum lot coverage shall be twenty-
five percent of the lot area. Shade structures
related to growing and agricultural production
may cover an additional fifteen percent of the
lot for a total allowed lot coverage of forty per-
cent of the lot area.
d. Buffers
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of
landscaping for the required setback distance,
including pathways as appropriate, as approved
by the design review board, shall be provided
between dissimilar uses or other districts.
e. Site Plan Review
Development plans shall be submitted for
approval by the design review board in accor-
dance with the provisions of Section 37. (Ord.
15-203 § 1 (part))
27A.04 Height Regulations
The height of the buildings shall not exceed
forty feet above grade nor two stories. (Ord. 15-
203 § 1 (part))
27A.05 Setback Regulations
a. Front Yard
1. There shall be a front yard having a
depth of not less than fifty feet unless approved
as part of a development plan.
2. Where a lot is located at the intersection
of two or more streets, there shall be a yard
conforming to the front yard requirements on
each street side of a corner lot. No accessory
building shall project in to yards required to
conform with the front yard requirements.
===PAGE 104===
27A.06
65-3 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 16,  2-15)
b. Side Yard
None required, except that:
1. Where a lot is adjacent to a residential
zoning district there shall be a side yard on the
side of the lot adjacent to such residential zon-
ing district having a width of not less than
thirty feet but at least equal to one foot of set-
back for each one foot of vertical height of the
principal building.
2. Where a lot abuts two streets there shall
be a side yard on the street side of such corner
lot having a width not less than fifty feet.
3. If a side yard is otherwise provided, it
shall have a width of not less than fifty feet.
c. Rear Yard
None required, except that:
1. Where a lot abuts a residential zoning
district whether or not separated by an alley,
there shall be a rear yard having a depth of at
least thirty feet but not less than one foot of set-
back for each one foot of vertical height of the
principal building.
2. Where a lot abuts two streets there shall
be a side yard on the street side of such corner
lot having a width not less than fifty feet. (Ord.
15-203 § 1 (part))
27A.06 Additional Regulations
a. An application for an agritourism dis-
trict shall include a master development plan
showing the proposed locations of the permit-
ted agritourism uses and the general sequence
of proposed development. The master develop-
ment plan shall become part of the approved re-
zoning ordinance. The council may require that
a development agreement pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 9-500.05 be processed and approved concur-
rently with the approval of the agritourism dis-
trict.
b. Any site plan approved pursuant to Sec-
tion 37 or minor land division or preliminary
plat approval pursuant to Chapter 14 of the city
code shall be consistent with the master devel-
opment plan approved as part of the ordinance
establishing the agritourism district.
c. Development of the parcel requires
review and approval of the design review board
in accordance with Section 39.
d. Any exterior lighting shall be directed
downward and away from adjacent property in
accordance with the city code and this zoning
code. See Section 31.15.
e. Provision of on-site stormwater reten-
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage
both entering and leaving the property shall be
as required by the city and the Maricopa
County Flood Control District, the procedures
for which shall be approved by the council.
f. Property signage shall conform with
commercial zoning dist rict signage standards
as described in Section 35.
g. All requirements of the Maricopa
County health department, the Arizona Depart-
ment of Health Services and other applicable
laws shall be complied with.
h. The processing, milling, or distilling
locations of agricultu ral products must be
shown on a project site plan and are subject to
use permit approval. Any associated noise,
smell, smoke, light or other potential negative
impacts on adjacent properties must be identi-
fied. Greater setbacks than based district stan-
dards may be imposed on the location of these
facilities.
i. Tour and charter bus access and staging
areas shall be shown on the project site plan.
Buses may only idle for fifteen minutes before
and after passenger drop-off.
j. Outdoor music or video broadcasts are
subject to use permit approval.
===PAGE 105===
27A.06
65-4 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 16,  2-15)
k. Special events requ ire a special event
permit pursuant to Chapter 19 of the city code.
(Ord. 15-203 § 1 (part))
===PAGE 106===
27B.01
65-5 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 19, 2-17)
SECTION 27B
COMMERCIAL-FLEX (CF) DISTRICT
Subsections:
27B.01 Land Use Definition
27B.02 Use Regulations
27B.03 Property Development 
Standards
27B.01 Land Use Definition
Commercial-flex: This category provides
areas for commercial centers which provide
everyday goods and services for a number of
neighborhoods, but also provides for residen-
tial uses if certain conditions are met. The com-
munity commercial area should be located
convenient to several  neighborhoods and be
accessed by major arterial streets.
All uses permitted in the community com-
mercial district are permitted in compliance
with the property development standards set
forth in Section 22.
Accessory uses and temporary uses require
use permit approval. (Ord. 16-214 § 1 (part))
27B.02 Use Regulations
A building or premises shall be used only for
the purposes as set forth in the city of Litchfield
Park zoning matrix (Section 28). (Ord. 16-214
§1  ( p a r t ) )
27B.03 Property Development Standards
The requirements of Section 22, Community
Commercial (CS) District, shall apply to this
district, except as modified below.
a. Area
The property shall have a minimum area of
twelve acres.
b. Residential Uses
Single-family residential uses are permitted
in compliance with the requirements of subsec-
tions c and d of this section.
c. Development Agreement
A development agreemen t shall be entered
into with the city governing the development of
the property. The development agreement shall
set forth the circumstances under which the
property may be used for residential uses. If the
circumstances permitting a residential use
exist, the property ow ner shall notify the city
and thereafter the use of the property shall be
residential in compliance with subsection d of
this section and no commercial use shall there-
after be commenced without approval of a
rezoning ordinance.
d. Property Development Standards for
Residential Uses
1. Density
Density shall not exceed five and one-half
dwelling units per acre.
2. Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit
The minimum lot area per dwelling unit
shall be six thousand square feet.
3. Floor Area
Residences shall have a livable floor area of
at least one thousand two hundred square feet.
4. Coverage
The maximum coverage shall be fifty per-
cent of the lot area.
5. Distance between Buildings
The minimum distance between buildings
on the same lot shall be ten feet.
6. Buffers
Buffer yards, consisting at a minimum of
landscaping for the required setback distance,
including pathways as appropriate, as
approved by the design review board, shall be
provided between dissimilar uses or other dis-
tricts.
===PAGE 107===
27B.03
65-6 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 19, 2-17)
7. Open Space Density Bonus
At least twenty percent of the net site area
shall be open space.
8. Height
The height of all structures shall not exceed
the lower of: (A) two stories; (B) thirty-five
feet from natural grade through any structure
cross-section.
9. Front Yard
There shall be a front yard having a depth of
not less than twenty feet. Where a lot is located
at the intersection of two or more streets, there
shall be a yard conforming to the front yard
requirements on each street side of a corner lot.
10. Side Yard
There shall be a side yard of at least ten feet,
except that on the street side the side yard set-
back shall be twenty feet unless adjacent to a
ten-foot landscape tract, in which case the side
yard setback shall be at least ten feet.
11. Rear Yard
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of
not less than twenty feet.
12. Private Streets
All streets within the project shall be pri-
vate.
13. Any exterior ligh ting shall be directed
downward and away from adjacent property in
accordance with the city code and this zoning
code. See Section 31.15.
14. Provisions for on-site stormwater reten-
tion/drainage and off-site stormwater drainage
both entering and leaving the property shall be
as required by the city of Litchfield Park and
the Maricopa County Flood Control District,
the procedures for which shall be approved by
the council.
15. Parking requirements set forth in Sec-
tion 29 applicable to high medium density res-
idential (R1-6) shall apply.
16. Requirements for walls, landscaping
and fences set forth in Section 30 shall apply.
17. Signage requirements set forth in Sec-
tion 35 applicable to high medium density res-
idential (R1-6) shall apply. (Ord. 16-214 § 1
(part))
===PAGE 108===
27C.01
65-7 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
SECTION 27C
CITY CENTER (CTR) DISTRICT
Subsections:
27C.01 Land Use Definition
27C.02 Use Regulations
27C.03 Property Development 
Standards
27C.04 Design Criteria
27C.01 Land Use Definition
City Center: This category provides areas
for pedestrian-oriented commercial and civic
core activities that include ground level retail
shops and restaurants, government and profes-
sional offices, public parks and plazas. Multi-
family residential units may be allowed with a
development agreement if approved by the
council. Any such use shall consist of a verti-
cally integrated mixed-use project, where at
least thirty percent of the project’s gross floor
area (GFA) is dedicated to nonresidential uses.
The city center (CTR) district may be approved
in the downtown area where the city council
determines an intense commercial core is
appropriate. At the effective date of the ordi-
nance codified in this section, the city of Litch-
field Park owns the real property in the initial
CTR district. As owner, the city intends to
impose conditions on each lease or sale of real
property to ensure that current and future uses
of the property will be in the best interest of the
city and its residents. (Ord. 25-290 § 2 (Exh.
A))
27C.02 Use Regulations
a. A building or premises shall be used
only for the purposes as set forth in Table
27C.02A – City Center Land Use Regulations:
‘P’ Permitted without special conditions
‘C’ Permitted with conditional use permit
‘T’ Permitted with a temporary use permit
‘D’ Permitted pursuant to a development agreement
Table 27C.02A – City Center Land Use Regulations
LAND USES CITY CENTER 
(CTR)
ADDITIONAL 
REQUIREMENTS
Bar, Tavern, Cocktail Lounge C
Community Facilities P
Convention Center D
Farmers’ Market, Outdoor P
Financial Institutions P
Fitness Center P
Food Truck Court T
Resort Expansion Rooms C
===PAGE 109===
27C.02
65-8 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
b. Permitted Land Use Definitions
Bar, Tavern or Cocktail Lounge An estab-
lishment including, but not limited to, a cock-
tail lounge, nightclub or tavern, the main use of
which is to serve spirituous liquors for on-site
consumption. Such a f acility may serve food,
provide dancing and entertainment.
Community Facilities A building or group
of buildings providing public and community
services including facilities that provide police
and fire protection, ambulance services, public
parking lots/garages and information centers.
Convention Center A facility, auditorium
or exhibition hall, used for the assembly, meet-
ing or gathering of a group of individuals.
Farmers’ Market, Outdoor  A market at
which predominantly farmers and producers
sell agricultural products and other items
directly to the general public. These items may
include fresh fruits, vegetables, meat products,
dairy, grains, and orig inally packaged ready-
to-eat items such as nuts, honeys, oils, and
juices. Sellers of other goods and services may
comprise up to twenty percent of the total num-
Offices
Medical and Dental P
Professional and Business P
Public and Government P
Personal Services P
Recreational Entertainment
Indoor, Less than 7,500 SF P
Indoor, Greater than 7,500 SF C
Outdoor C
Religious Institution P
Residential Units
Attached D
Restaurant P
Retail, General
Less than 7,500 SF per User P
Greater than 7,500 SF per User C
Schools
Private C
Public/Charter P
Vocational/Trade C
Smoke Lounge C
Winery/Distillery/Microbrewery C
Table 27C.02A – City Center Land Use Regulations (Continued)
LAND USES CITY CENTER 
(CTR)
ADDITIONAL 
REQUIREMENTS
===PAGE 110===
27C.02
65-9 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
ber of vendors. Secondhand sales of clothing,
household items, or other used goods are pro-
hibited.
Financial Institutions Banks, trust compa-
nies, savings and loan associations, credit
unions, consumer lenders, international bank-
ing facilities and financ ial institution holding
companies under the ju risdiction of the Ari-
zona Department of Financial Institutions.
Fitness Center A facility offering space and
equipment to the genera l public for the pur-
poses of exercising, weightlifting and other
physical activity. Amen ities such as tanning
booths, saunas, and retail of limited nonpre-
scription health supplements may be offered on
the premises. This excl udes physical rehabili-
tation services or clinics.
Food Truck Court A grouping of three or
more large motorized vehicles, such as vans or
trailers, equipped to cook, prepare, serve,
and/or sell food.
Offices
Medical and Dental  A building or facility
providing medical, dental, chiropractic and
psychiatric services, as well as medical and
dental laboratories incidental to the medi-
cal/dental office use. This classification
includes home health agencies as defined in
A.R.S. § 36-151.
Professional and Business A building or
facility containing office space where a partic-
ular kind of business is transacted or a service
is supplied, excluding retailing, according to
the following:
1. A place in which functions such as con-
sulting, record keeping,  or clerical work are
performed.
2. A place in which a professional person
(e.g., lawyer, accounting, financial or invest-
ment advisor) conducts professional services.
Public and Government  A building or
facility containing office space where govern-
ment or public transactions or services are con-
ducted or operated from.
Personal Services An establishment offer-
ing services of a personal nature including but
not limited to barber sh ops, beauty and nail
salons, cosmetologists, massage therapy, tan-
ning salons, day spas and pet grooming.
Recreational Entertainment An establish-
ment offering public or private recreational ser-
vices and/or entertainment. Indoor uses and
classifications can include: movie theatres,
bowling alleys, pool halls, museums and gal-
leries, arcades, sport co urts and other similar
uses. Outdoor uses and classifications can
include: miniature golf courses, outdoor sports
courts, zoos, swimming pools, splash pads,
botanical gardens and other similar uses.
Religious Institution  A permanently
located building or groups of buildings or
structure wherein people regularly assemble
for religious worship and which is maintained
and controlled by a religious body to sustain
public worship and church-related uses. This
definition pertains, as well, to temporary facil-
ities.
Residential Unit Units providing long-term
residential living accommodations.
Attached A one-family dwelling attached to
one or more one-family dwellings by common
vertical walls forming a building or group of
buildings on one or mo re lots. This use may
include condominiums, townhomes, duplexes,
triplexes or other similar uses where the dwell-
ing units are attached.
Resort Expansion Rooms  Hotel rooms
owned and operated by an existing resort, as
opposed to a standalone hotel.
Restaurant An establishment where meals
are prepared and served to the public for con-
===PAGE 111===
27C.03
65-10 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
sumption on the premises. Alcohol may be
served with at least forty percent of gross rev-
enue sales being from the sale of food. Takeout
service may be provided.
Retail, General Establishments engaged in
the sale of merchandise, goods, and groceries
including rental services such as party supplies,
clothing. This classification excludes building
material and home improvement sales and ser-
vices, furniture retail  sales, hardware retail,
convenience retail sales, commercial vehi-
cle/equipment sales and rental, motor vehicle
sales and leasing, and pawn shops.
Schools
Private or Public A facility for educational
and/or classroom purposes operated by public,
private, or charter educational institutions that
offers a general course of study at primary,
middle, or high school levels, including semi-
naries, study centers, athletic facilities, voca-
tional and trade programs, and boarding that
are incidental to the operation of such schools.
Vocation/Trade A facility offering instruc-
tion in special business, technical, trade, and
vocational skills such as real estate colleges,
business colleges, electronic schools, automo-
tive and aircraft technician schools, and similar
establishments operated by nongovernmental
organizations.
Smoke Lounge  An establishment that is
dedicated, in whole or in part, to selling
tobacco and/or providing an area for the recre-
ational smoking of tobacco products, includ-
ing, but not limited to, cigar lounges, tobacco
bars and hookah lounges.
Winery/Distillery/Microbrewery A place
where wine, beer or other spiritous liquor is dis-
tilled and manufactured for on-site consump-
tion and sales or off-site consumption or sales.
Incidental uses related to the serving of food
and restaurant dining are allowed. (Ord. 25-290
§2  ( E x h .  A ) )
27C.03 Property Development Standards
Table 27C.03A – Property Development Standards
STANDARDS CITY CENTER 
(CTR) ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT*
Stories 3 *Properties located within the CTR perimeter 
are limited to 2 stories and a 35' building 
height, unless greater height is approved 
through a PD overlay by the city council
Feet 54'
BUILDING STANDARDS
Gross Floor Area Ratio (Max.) 2.0
Building Separation 0' Where separat ion is provided, a minimum 10' 
of space between buildings shall be provided
Building Coverage (Max.) 100%
===PAGE 112===
27C.04
65-11 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
*CTR District Perimeter is defined as property within 150' of either (1) W. Wigwam Boulevard, or (2)
W. Fairway Drive rights-of-way. Parking structures located within the CTR perimeter shall be carefully
designed to buffer adjacent residential uses and limit traffic impact on nearby residential streets.
a. Additional Property Development 
Standards
1. Development shall comply with Section 
31, General Provisions.
2. Requirements for walls, landscaping 
and fences are set forth in Section 30, Walls,  
Landscaping and Fences.
3. Signage requirements are set forth in 
Section 35, Signs, or as amended by the city 
council through approval of a comprehensive 
sign plan.
4. Parking requirements are set forth in 
Section 29, Parking and Loading Regulations, 
or as amended by city council through approval 
of a project’s parking demand study.
5. Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec-
tion 3.04(d)(1), the design review board may
recommend approval, conditional approval or
denial of an application. The city council shall
approve, conditionally approve or deny appli-
cations for development in the city center.
(Ord. 25-290 § 2 (Exh. A))
27C.04 Design Criteria
a. Purpose
The purpose of these design criteria is to pro-
vide a framework for the city of Litchfield
Park’s design review process as well as build
the framework for the design of its downtown
area (city center). The criteria give direction
and reference to developers, governing bodies,
city staff and the general public on policies and
direction for how the city will implement spe-
cific designs and architectural styles.
SETBACKS (Min.)
Residential Use 0' See Design Criteria (Section 27C.04)
Nonresidential Use 0' See Design Criteria (Section 27C.04)
Arterial Street 0' See Design Criteria (Section 27C.04)
Nonarterial 0' See Design Criteria (Section 27C.04)
SETBACKS (Min.) – CTR District Perimeter*
Residential Use 20' See Design Criteria (Section 27C.04)
Nonresidential Use 0' See Design Criteria (Section 27C.04)
Arterial Street 20' See Design Criteria (Section 27C.04)
Nonarterial 20' See Design Criteria (Section 27C.04)
LANDSCAPE SETBACKS
Residential Use 0' See Design Criteria (Section 27C.04)
Nonresidential Use 0' See Design Criteria (Section 27C.04)
Arterial Street 0' See Design Criteria (Section 27C.04)
Nonarterial 0' See Design Criteria (Section 27C.04)
Table 27C.03A – Property Development Standards (Continued)
STANDARDS CITY CENTER 
(CTR) ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
===PAGE 113===
27C.04
65-12 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
b. Land Use Concepts
1. Commercial
A majority of the parcels within the city cen-
ter area are anticipated to develop with com-
mercial uses. It is the focus of the city center to
develop specialty retail, restaurant, and enter-
tainment venues. Additional commercial
development will provide local residents,
resort visitors, and Valley residents a lifestyle
destination that is unique to the Phoenix metro-
politan area.
2. Office/Business
Office development, including Class A
office space for both government and profes-
sional offices, will be important in accomplish-
ing the goal of a pedestrian-oriented
environment in the city  center. This will pro-
vide needed population and activity downtown
during normal business hours rather than just
peak periods of evenings and weekends as gen-
erally associated with retail and restaurant
activities.
3. High Density Multifamily Residential
While development downtown is primarily
intended to serve commercial, office, and
resort needs, the council may consider multi-
family high density residential development if
it determines such use will facilitate the city’s
vision for a pedestrian -oriented environment.
Any such use must provide a unique lifestyle
and living choice for resi dents, including resi-
dential units above retail and office space. High
density multifamily resi dential uses may only
be approved pursuant to a development agree-
ment and would be limited to seventy percent
of the gross floor area of a development pro-
posal.
c. Design Elements
1. Expanding Upon Litchfield Park’s
Legacy and Special Sense of Place
Combining a “lush” oasis appearance
among set design buildings and landscape that
merge the built environment with desert-
themed vegetation.
2. Compact Building Arrangements
Taller buildings should cluster together and
look down onto the city center with a centered
focus that contributes natural shading and roof-
line variation for pedestrian foot traffic.
3. Pedestrian Walkways
Pedestrian traffic from neighboring areas
should lead into the city center creating a sense
of invitation for local traffic and guests staying
at the Wigwam Resort. Walkways should be
buffered from major vehi cular roadways and
traffic. Hardscape and vegetative barriers
between the resort and the city center should be
eliminated to the extent possible to provide
freedom of movement.
4. Focal Points
Creating thematic featur es that convey the
identity of Litchfield Park. Focal points should
mark a gateway feeling to entrances in the
downtown city center and create subtle experi-
ences for pedestrians as they pass from one area
to another. Examples of such transitions may
include: towers, domes, fountains and public
art displays that provide desired visual effect.
Transitioning spaces should be framed with
full-radius arches that show strolling options
past the entries.
5. Architectural Features
Throughout the city center, buildings, path-
ways, retail and landscaping should be accom-
modated with small architectural pieces such as
light fixtures, decorative tile, and sign brackets
that enhance the pedestrian-scale experience.
6. Parking Design
It is important that surface parking (covered
and uncovered) and parking structures be inte-
grated into the overall building design and lay-
out of the city center. Parking areas should be
tucked behind and sometimes in between
buildings, allowing the streetscape to be domi-
===PAGE 114===
27C.04
65-13 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
nated by retail and office space along its edges.
A parking structure should serve to function for
several surrounding or nearby buildings as well
as remain relatively accessible by minor streets
while remaining relative ly less dominant than
its surrounding buildin g counterparts. Surface
and structured parkin g should accommodate
appropriate design as well as landscape fea-
tures to minimize its otherwise dulling impact
on the streetscape.
7. Environmental Sensitivity
The city center landscape should establish a
clear hierarchy of plant materials that can iden-
tify and accommodate major streets, gateway
entrances and pedestrian pathways. Plants
should be selected for their drought tolerance
and maintenance as well as match the sur-
rounding oasis-style landscape. Plants should
be grouped according to watering require-
ments.
8. Signage/Graphics
Signs should be considered an integral part
of the city center’s architectural schematics and
incorporate business id entification, location
identification and directional information.
Directory signs may be appropriate for each
individual sub-area and serve at the pedestrian
scale. City council may approve comprehen-
sive sign plans that deviate from provisions in
Section 35, Signs, so long as the applicant can
provide justification that such deviations can
fulfill the purpose of the design criteria of the
city center.
d. Relationships to Existing Develop-
ment
It is the responsibility of developers, plan-
ners, and architects to demonstrate that new site
development is consiste nt with these guide-
lines, the Zoning Code , building formation,
landscape design and facade patterns of neigh-
boring properties and land uses within the city
center. New development shall demonstrate an
ability to coexist with current uses of adjacent
properties.
1. Building Arrangement
The arrangement of properties within an
area should provide for open space and circu-
lation from one development to another.
2. Facades
Buildings facades with open courtyards
should open out and connect with adjacent
buildings that also have courtyards. New devel-
opments should not intrude on the open space
themes of existing buildings.
3. Coverage
Area coverage of adjacent building(s) and
newer buildings is encouraged to remain even
and consistent.
4. Alignment
Lineup of buildings should remain even and
parallel with street and pedestrian sidewalks.
e. Building Height and Form
The height of buildings is important in rela-
tionship to adjacent and abutting development.
The city encourages bu ilding heights of up to
two stories and thirty-five feet. Buildings over
two stories are permitted in the city center dis-
trict, outside of the area designated as the
perimeter, and should be appropriately scaled
and oriented to adjacent development.
f. Streetscape and Building Frontage
Building frontages should be active and
inviting and allow for a consistent stream of
doorways and walkways that are visible from
sidewalks and the street. The building lineup
against the street should consist of retail shops,
commercial buildings, and restaurants which
show activity and life and would capture pedes-
===PAGE 115===
27C.04
65-14 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
trian traffic within the city center area. Devel-
opers are encouraged to:
1. Provide ground level openings and win-
dows so that walk-by pedestrians have multiple
optional entries and focal points.
2. Provide windows and see-through open-
ings so that pedestrians can view displays
shown.
3. Create multiple entrances into building
alongside the street or within open space alley-
ways.
4. Buildings with street frontages should
have primary entrances facing the street.
g. Setbacks and Stepbacks
Building setbacks should be considered as
“build to” lines rather than setback lines in the
effort to bring buildings to the street. Second
and third floors of office and retail centers are
encouraged to provid e stepbacks whereas
opportunities for upper floor balconies, patios,
and terraces are encouraged along streetscapes
to provide outdoor activities on more than just
the ground level.
h. Building Proportions
Development proposal s shall demonstrate
proper proportions and scale.
1. Proportions of buildings and structures
shall emphasize horizontal width rather than
height.
2. Spacing of elemental designs and fea-
tures should be varied rather than repetitive.
3. Downtown buildings should focus on a
maximum building height level of three stories
or fifty-four feet. Properties within one hun-
dred fifty feet of W. Wigwam Boulevard and
W. Fairway Drive should have lower building
heights to protect nearby residential develop-
ment for large building masses.
i. Building Edge
Similar to the street frontage, the street edge
focuses more on the prop erty line of the busi-
ness to the street. It is important that developers
accommodate openness and covered walkways
in the overall building frontage concept. Busi-
nesses are encouraged to  provide the follow-
ing:
1. Desired building street edges should be
a continuous even edge facing main arterial
streets with a generally zero-foot or minimal
setback provided. Suburban development
forms of placing customer parking between the
building and the street are highly discouraged.
2. Setbacks should work in tandem with a
wide sidewalk to provide a minimum of a
twenty-foot pedestrian space and buffering
from building edge to st reet curb. In locations
where a sidewalk less than twenty feet has been
provided, an equivalent building setback
should be provided to allow a twenty-foot
pedestrian pathway between back of street curb
and building.
3. Development of building edges should
host covered walkways or other shaded spaces
tucked under the building edge. The use of trees
and tree grates along all edges and walkways is
highly desired.
4. Shallow building courtyards and patios
facing the street should meet the edge and be
defined by a low wall, fencing or equivalent
landscaping. (Ord. 25-290 § 2 (Exh. A))
===PAGE 116===
66 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
28
SECTION 28
ZONING MATRIX/DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY
ZONING MATRIX
LAND USES RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Residential 
Estate
Low Dens. 
Residential
L-M Dens.
Re
sidential
Med. Dens. 
Residential
H-M Dens. 
Residential
High Dens. 
Residential
Low Dens. 
Multifamily
Med. Dens. 
Multifamily
High Dens. 
Multifamily
Patio Home 
Residential
RE R1 R1-15 R1-8 R1-6 RC MFL MFM MFH PH
Child care centers C C C C C C C C C C
C h u r c h e s PPPPPP P P P P
Community facilities P P P P P P P P P P
Convalescent home – – – – – C C C C C
Family group home #
Section 31.17
PPPPPP P P P P
Government facilities P P P P P P P P P P
Information center T T T T T T T T T T
Model home sales complex T T T T T T T T T T
Residential, cluster – – C C P P P P P P
Residential condominium 
projects
–––––– P P P –
Residential single-family P P P P P P – – – P
‘P’ - Permitted without special conditions.
‘C’ - Permitted with a conditional use permit.
‘T’ - Permitted with a temporary use permit.
‘#’ - Permitted when in complianc e with additional standards.
‘*’ - Uses which shall be required to maintain a separation from other like uses and ot her types of uses as defined in Section 33.02(c)(6).
‘
–’ - Not permitted.
Zoning Code Sections 10 through 27 prevail in cases of conflict.
===PAGE 117===
67 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
28
Schools P P P P P P P P P P
Structured sober living 
homes #
Section 31.17
City Code 8-5
CCCCCC C C C C
Vehicle storage, home C C C C C C C C C C
Wireless communications 
facilities # 
Section 36
CCCCCC C C C C
ZONING MATRIX (Continued)
LAND USES RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Residential 
Estate
Low Dens. 
Residential
L-M Dens. 
Residential
Med. Dens. 
Residential
H-M Dens. 
Residential
High Dens. 
Residential
Low Dens. 
Multifamily
Med. Dens. 
Multifamily
High Dens. 
Multifamily
Patio Home 
Residential
RE R1 R1-15 R1-8 R1-6 RC MFL MFM MFH PH
‘P’ - Permitted without special conditions.
‘C’ - Permitted with a conditional use permit.
‘T’ - Permitted with a temporary use permit.
‘#’ - Permitted when in complianc e with additional standards.
‘*’ - Uses which shall be required to mainta in a separation from other like uses and other types of uses as defined in Section 33.02(c)(6).
‘
–’ - Not permitted.
Zoning Code Sections 10 through 27 prevail in cases of conflict.
===PAGE 118===
68 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
28
ZONING MATRIX
LAND USES NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Resort Neighborhood 
Commercial
Community 
Commercial
Regional 
Commercial
General 
Industrial
Open 
Space
Public 
Facility Agritourism Commercial-
Flex
RT NC CS RS I OS PF AT CF
Agritainment – – – – – – – P –
Arcades, games and centers – C P P – – C – P**
Auto fueling and service stations – C P P P – – – P**
Bar, tavern, cocktail lounge P C P P C – – P P**
Barber – P P P P – – – P**
Beauty shops – P P P P – – – P**
Billiard/pool hall* – C P P P – – – P**
Building contractors (storage of goods, materials, 
and equipment)*
–– – – C – – – –
Building materials/home improvement – – C C C – – – C**
Car rentals P C P P P – – – P**
Car wash – – P P P – – – P**
Chemical storage requiring a material safety data 
sheet*
–C C C C – –– C * *
‘P’ - Permitted without special conditions.
‘C’ - Permitted with a conditional use permit.
‘T’ - Permitted with a temporary use permit.
‘#’ - Permitted when in complianc e with additional standards.
‘*’ - Uses which shall be required to mainta in a separation from other like uses and other types of uses as defined in Section 33.02(c)(6).
‘
–’ - Not permitted.
‘**’ - When developed as commercial; prohibited when develope d as residential as per Section 27B unless otherwise noted.
‘+’ - Applies to resident ial portion when developed as per Section 27B.
Zoning Code Sections 10 through 27 prevail in cases of conflict.
===PAGE 119===
69 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
28
Child care centers P P P P C – P P P**
P+
Churches P P P P P P P P P
Cleaners, dry* – C P P P – – – P**
Clinics (health, medical) – C P P – C – P**
Commercial recreation C C P P P P C P P**
Community facilities – P P P P P P P P**
P+
Continuum of care facility – – – – – – P P –
Convention services P – P P C – P – P**
Convalescent home – – – – – – C – C+
Convenience stores – C P P P – – – P**
Department stores – C P P – – – – P**
Designated caregiver cultivation location #
Sections 31.21, 31.24
–– – – P – – – –
ZONING MATRIX (Continued)
LAND USES NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Resort Neighborhood 
Commercial
Community 
Commercial
Regional 
Commercial
General 
Industrial
Open 
Space
Public 
Facility Agritourism Commercial-
Flex
RT NC CS RS I OS PF AT CF
‘P’ - Permitted without special conditions.
‘C’ - Permitted with a conditional use permit.
‘T’ - Permitted with a temporary use permit.
‘#’ - Permitted when in complianc e with additional standards.
‘*’ - Uses which shall be required to mainta in a separation from other like uses and other types of uses as defined in Section 33.02(c)(6).
‘
–’ - Not permitted.
‘**’ - When developed as commercial; prohibited when develope d as residential as per Section 27B unless otherwise noted.
‘+’ - Applies to resident ial portion when developed as per Section 27B.
Zoning Code Sections 10 through 27 prevail in cases of conflict.
===PAGE 120===
69-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
28
Equipment rental – C C C P – – – **
Family group home #
Section 31.17
–– – – – – – – P +
Farmers’ market, outdoor T T T T T – T P T
Financial institutions (chartered banks, brokers, 
investment, loans)
CP P P – – –– P * *
Fraternal and civic clubs C C P C C – C – P**
Funeral parlors, mortuaries – C C P P – – – P**
Golf courses P – – – – P – – –
Government facilities – P P P P P P – P**
P+
Health clubs P P P P P C C – P**
Heliports – – – C P – – – –
Hospitals – – – – C – – – –
Hotel/motel P – P P P – – C P**
ZONING MATRIX (Continued)
LAND USES NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Resort Neighborhood 
Commercial
Community 
Commercial
Regional 
Commercial
General 
Industrial
Open 
Space
Public 
Facility Agritourism Commercial-
Flex
RT NC CS RS I OS PF AT CF
‘P’ - Permitted without special conditions.
‘C’ - Permitted with a conditional use permit.
‘T’ - Permitted with a temporary use permit.
‘#’ - Permitted when in complianc e with additional standards.
‘*’ - Uses which shall be required to mainta in a separation from other like uses and other types of uses as defined in Section 33.02(c)(6).
‘
–’ - Not permitted.
‘**’ - When developed as commercial; prohibited when develope d as residential as per Section 27B unless otherwise noted.
‘+’ - Applies to resident ial portion when developed as per Section 27B.
Zoning Code Sections 10 through 27 prevail in cases of conflict.
===PAGE 121===
69-2 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
28
Industries, construction – – – – P – – – –
Industries, manufacturing – – – – P – – – –
Industries, service – – C C P – – – C**
Information center P P P P – – P – P**
P+
Kennels – – – – P – – – –
Manufactured structures C C C C C C C – C**
P+
Medical marijuana dispensary #
Sections 31.21, 31.24
–– – – P – – – –
Medical marijuana dispensary cultivation 
location #
Sections 31.21, 31.24
–– – – P – – – –
Miniwarehouse – C C C P – – – C**
Model home sales complex T – – – – – – T T
Nonchartered financial institutions* – – C C C – – – C**
ZONING MATRIX (Continued)
LAND USES NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Resort Neighborhood 
Commercial
Community 
Commercial
Regional 
Commercial
General 
Industrial
Open 
Space
Public 
Facility Agritourism Commercial-
Flex
RT NC CS RS I OS PF AT CF
‘P’ - Permitted without special conditions.
‘C’ - Permitted with a conditional use permit.
‘T’ - Permitted with a temporary use permit.
‘#’ - Permitted when in complianc e with additional standards.
‘*’ - Uses which shall be required to mainta in a separation from other like uses and other types of uses as defined in Section 33.02(c)(6).
‘
–’ - Not permitted.
‘**’ - When developed as commercial; prohibited when develope d as residential as per Section 27B unless otherwise noted.
‘+’ - Applies to resident ial portion when developed as per Section 27B.
Zoning Code Sections 10 through 27 prevail in cases of conflict.
===PAGE 122===
69-3 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
28
Nurseries (day) and kindergarten (licensed) – C P P P – – – P**
Offices, medical, dentist – P P P P – – – P**
Offices, professional/business P P P P P – C P P**
Pawn shops/brokers* – – C C C – – – C**
Pest control services* – – – – C – – – –
Plant nurseries, greenhouse commercial* – – – – P C C P –
Recreational marijuana establishment #
Sections 31.21, 31.24
–– – – P – – – –
Recreational marijuana testing facility #
Sections 31.21, 31.24
–– – – P – – – –
Research and development – C C C P – – – C**
Residential, cluster – – – – – – – C –
Residential condominium projects – – – – – – – C –
Restaurants P P P P P – – P P**
ZONING MATRIX (Continued)
LAND USES NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Resort Neighborhood 
Commercial
Community 
Commercial
Regional 
Commercial
General 
Industrial
Open 
Space
Public 
Facility Agritourism Commercial-
Flex
RT NC CS RS I OS PF AT CF
‘P’ - Permitted without special conditions.
‘C’ - Permitted with a conditional use permit.
‘T’ - Permitted with a temporary use permit.
‘#’ - Permitted when in complianc e with additional standards.
‘*’ - Uses which shall be required to mainta in a separation from other like uses and other types of uses as defined in Section 33.02(c)(6).
‘
–’ - Not permitted.
‘**’ - When developed as commercial; prohibited when develope d as residential as per Section 27B unless otherwise noted.
‘+’ - Applies to resident ial portion when developed as per Section 27B.
Zoning Code Sections 10 through 27 prevail in cases of conflict.
===PAGE 123===
69-4 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
28
Retail (e.g., hardware, paint, wallpaper, fabrics, 
supplies, curtains, linens, knitting supplies, china, 
glass, pottery)
–C P P P – –P P * *
Retail and services, general C P P P C – – P P**
Schools P P P P P P P P P
Solid waste stations – – – – C – C – –
Stables C – – – – C C – –
Structured sober living homes #
Section 31.17
City Code 8-5
–– – – – – – – C +
Supermarkets – C P P P – – – P**
Truck terminals – – – – P – – – –
Vehicle repair, business – C C C P – – – C**
Vehicle sales, business – – P P P – – – P**
Vehicle storage, home – – – – – – – – C+
ZONING MATRIX (Continued)
LAND USES NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Resort Neighborhood 
Commercial
Community 
Commercial
Regional 
Commercial
General 
Industrial
Open 
Space
Public 
Facility Agritourism Commercial-
Flex
RT NC CS RS I OS PF AT CF
‘P’ - Permitted without special conditions.
‘C’ - Permitted with a conditional use permit.
‘T’ - Permitted with a temporary use permit.
‘#’ - Permitted when in complianc e with additional standards.
‘*’ - Uses which shall be required to mainta in a separation from other like uses and other types of uses as defined in Section 33.02(c)(6).
‘
–’ - Not permitted.
‘**’ - When developed as commercial; prohibited when develope d as residential as per Section 27B unless otherwise noted.
‘+’ - Applies to resident ial portion when developed as per Section 27B.
Zoning Code Sections 10 through 27 prevail in cases of conflict.
===PAGE 124===
69-5 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
28
(Ord. 25-290 § 2 (Exh. A))
Vehicle storage, business – C C C P – – – C**
Veterinary services, domestic (hospital or clinic) – C P P P – C – P**
Winery/distillery – – – – – – – C –
Wireless communications facilities #
Section 36
CC C C C C C C C * *
ZONING MATRIX (Continued)
LAND USES NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Resort Neighborhood 
Commercial
Community 
Commercial
Regional 
Commercial
General 
Industrial
Open 
Space
Public 
Facility Agritourism Commercial-
Flex
RT NC CS RS I OS PF AT CF
‘P’ - Permitted without special conditions.
‘C’ - Permitted with a conditional use permit.
‘T’ - Permitted with a temporary use permit.
‘#’ - Permitted when in complianc e with additional standards.
‘*’ - Uses which shall be required to mainta in a separation from other like uses and other types of uses as defined in Section 33.02(c)(6).
‘
–’ - Not permitted.
‘**’ - When developed as commercial; prohibited when develope d as residential as per Section 27B unless otherwise noted.
‘+’ - Applies to resident ial portion when developed as per Section 27B.
Zoning Code Sections 10 through 27 prevail in cases of conflict.
===PAGE 125===
-..:i 
0 
SECTION 28 
DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY 
ZONING DESIGNATION RE Rl Rl-15 Rl-8 Rl-6 RC 
SECTION NUMBER 10 II 12 13 14 15 
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT 
Stories 1-2* 1-2* 1-2* 1-2* 1-2* 1-2* 
Feet 25-35* 25-35* 25-35* 25-35* 25-35* 25-35* 
BUILDING SIZE • PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS 
Minimum Square Footage 3,000 2,350 1,850 1,500 1,200 * 
MINIMUM YARD DATA 
Front 40* 35* 30* 25* 20* 10• 
Rear 40* 35* 30* 25* 20* 10* 
Interior Side 30* 15 15 12 10 10* 
Street Side 40* 35* 30* 25* 20* 10* 
USE INTENSITY DATA 
Units Per Acre (-) 0.8 0.8-1.6 1.7-2.3 2.4-4.1 4.2-6.5 6.6-12.0 
Minimum Development - 2 2 2 2 2 5 
Acres 
Minimum Lot Area - Square 43,560 21,780 15,000 8,000 6,000 3,600 
Feet 
Minimum Width 150 110 80 60 40 NIA 
Maximum Coverage 30% 30% 30% 40% 50% 60% 
Building Distance NIA NIA NIA NIA NIA 10 
*Review pertinent section for limitations 
Note: Zoning Code Sections 10 through 27 prevail 
MFL MFM 
16 17 
2• 2* 
35 35 
• * 
20 25 
20 25 
20* 25* 
20 25 
12.0-18.0 18.1-24.0 
5 5 
2,400 2,000 
NIA NIA 
60% 60% 
10 10 
MFR 
18 
3* 
40 
• 
30 
30 
30* 
30 
24.1-30.0 
5 
1,800 
NIA 
60% 
10 
PH 
19 
1-2* 
25-35* 
1,000 
10* 
10 
5* 
10* 
4.8-8.2 
2 
4,000 
40 
60% 
10 
N 00 
===PAGE 126===
71 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 19, 2-17)
28
SECTION 28
DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY (continued)
(Ord. 16-214 § 1 (part))
ZONING DESIGNATION
SECTION NUMBER
RT
20
NC
21
CS
22
RS
23
I
24
OS
25
PD
26
PF
27
CF
RESIDENTIAL
27B
CF
COMMERCIAL
27B
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
Stories 2 2* 2 8 3* 1 * 3* 1-2* 2
Feet 35 30* 40 80 50* 15 * 45* 35* max 40
BUILDING SIZE - PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS
Minimum Square Footage N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1,200 N/A
MINIMUM YARD DATA
Front 30 50* 50* 80* 100* 30 * 20 20* 50*
Rear 30 50* 50* 80* 100* 30 * 30* 20* 50*
Interior Side 30 30* 50* 80* 100* 15 * 30* 10* 50*
Street Side 30 50* * 80* 100* 30 * 20 20* *
USE INTENSITY DATA
Units Per Acre N/A N/A N/A N/A N/ A N/A N/A* N/A* 5.5 or less N/A
M i n i m u m  D e v e l o p m e n t  -  A c r e s 1 021 5 3 0 4 02 * 1 2 1 2
Minimum Lot Area - Square Feet 4,000* 4,000 15,000 70,000 45,000 * N/A N/A 6,000 15,000
Minimum Width 300 N/A 150 300 300 60 N/A* 60 40 150
Maximum Coverage 60% 60% 60% 60% 60% 5% N/A* 60% 50% 60%
Building Distance 10* 10* 20* 50* 50* N/A N/A* 10 N/A 20*
*Review pertinent section for limitations
Note: Zoning Code Sections 10 through 27 prevail
===PAGE 127===
29.01
72 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 7,  6-09)
SECTION 29
PARKING AND LOADING 
REGULATIONS
Subsections:
29.01 Applicability
29.02 Purpose and Intent
29.03 Definitions
29.04 Requirements for Off-Street 
Parking
29.05 Location of Required Parking 
Spaces and Parking Areas
29.06 Calculation of Required Off-
Street Parking
29.07 Dimensions and Circulation
29.08 General Design Requirements
29.09 Parking Area Surfacing 
Improvements
29.10 Handicapped Parking
29.11 Parking Restrictions for 
Residential Uses
29.12 Off-Street Loading 
Requirements
29.13 Parking Matrix
29.14 Violation; Penalties
29.01 Applicability
The following provisions shall apply to new
uses and expanded existing uses. (Ord. 09-147
§ I (part))
29.02 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this section is to minimize
congestion of the public streets and to promote
the safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 09-
147 § I (part))
29.03 Definitions
a. Driveway means that portion of a parcel
adjacent to a parking area that is used for
ingress to and egress from the parcel.
b. Gross Floor Area means the total area
of a building calculated by measuring the out-
side dimensions of all of the building’s floor
levels except attics.
c. Parking Area  means the total area
including parking spaces, parking aisles and
loading and unloading areas. This area is cal-
culated by adding the requirements for parking
spaces, parking aisles, and loading and unload-
ing areas.
d. Parking Aisles  means an area consist-
ing of lanes providing circulation between
parking spaces and driveways.
e. Parking Space  means a portion of the
parking area required for the parking of one
vehicle.
f. Use means the purpose or activity for
which a building, parcel or structure is
arranged, designed, occupied or maintained.
(Ord. 09-147 § I (part))
29.04 Requirements for Off-Street Parking
a. General
1. Off-street parking is required as set
forth in this Section 29. If there is a use for
which no parking requirements are set forth in
this section, the zoning administrator shall
impose a parking requirement based on the use
most similar that is consistent with the parking
ratios or allocations as set forth in the institute
for traffic engineer standards.
2. Maintenance of Parking Areas
All parking areas shall be maintained in
good condition. Maintenance shall include but
not be limited to fixing potholes, filling cracks,
and maintaining the appearance of the parking
area.
===PAGE 128===
29.05
73 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 27, 4-24)
3. No Storage
The use of an off-street parking space for
the storage of merchandise, supplies, equip-
ment, vehicles for sale or rent, vehicles used
for business identification signage, or for
repair of vehicles, is prohibited.
4. Change In Use
A. When the use of any existing building,
structure, or premises is changed such that the
change requires an increase in the total number
of required parking spaces for the parcel of
greater than ten percent or twenty spaces, then
such additional parking spaces and parking and
loading areas shall be provided for the entire
building, structure or premises either on the
premises or by joint off-site parking agree-
ment.
B. When the use of any existing building,
structure or premises is changed such that an
increase in parking spaces required is less than
ten percent of the total required for the site or
twenty spaces, then the change of use or inten-
sity is exempt from the requirements of this
section.
5. Required Improvements
Construction of required parking areas shall
be completed in accorda nce with this section
prior to commencement of the use or occu-
pancy of the parcel. (Ord. 09-147 § I (part))
29.05 Location of Required Parking Spaces 
and Parking Areas
a. Residential Uses
Parking spaces for residential uses shall be
located on site. Parking spaces required by Sec-
tion 29.13 shall not be in the rear yard except
in an enclosed garage.
b. Nonresidential Uses
1. Except as provided in paragraph 2,
parking areas shall be located on site.
2. Parking areas may be located off site
only in accordance with the following require-
ments:
A. The parking area is located within three
hundred feet of the building or use it is
intended to serve. The distance shall be mea-
sured from the nearest point of the building or
use.
B. Shared parking areas may be approved
by the council for large scale planned commer-
cial developments more than ten acres in size.
Such shared parking areas shall not be located
farther than one thousand three hundred feet
from the nearest point of such building or use.
C. Off-site parking areas may be approved
by the zoning administrator if the parking area
is within six hundred feet of the associated
business as part of a development plan when it
can be demonstrated to be of benefit to the
public interest. A decision to deny a develop-
ment plan with off-sit e or on-street parking
may be appealed to the board of adjustment.
(Ord. 24-279 § 1; Ord. 18-227 § 1 (part); Ord.
09-147 § I (part))
29.06 Calculation of Required Off-Street 
Parking
a. General
Except as otherwise provided in this subsec-
tion, one parking area may contain required
parking spaces for more than one use, but the
required parking space assigned to one use may
not be credited to any other use. The number of
required parking spaces shall be the sum of the
number of parking spaces required for each
use.
b. Nonsimultaneous Uses
Where there is a combination of uses on a
parcel, if, in the opinion of the zoning adminis-
trator, the uses would not be operated simulta-
neously, the number of parking spaces shall be
determined by the use with the highest parking
===PAGE 129===
29.06
73-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
demand. A properly drawn and executed
instrument shall be signed and notarized by the
various parties involved that details how the 
===PAGE 130===
29.07
74 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 7,  6-09)
reduced parking shall be provided if one or
more of the users of the shared parking contract
vacate the premises.
If the uses change the owners of the new uses
shall once again submit to the city a draft
shared parking agreement for the city to
review. The city will evaluate the proposed
uses and determine if ample parking is pro-
vided on the site. If the city’s determination is
such that ample parking is provided on site the
shared parking agreement shall be recorded as
a property drawn and executed instrument,
signed and notarized, and a copy of the instru-
ment shall be given to the city. If the city deter-
mines that the site would be inadequately
parked for the proposed uses the additional
parking spaces shall be provided or such uses
will not be approved and a certificate of occu-
pancy shall not be issued.
c. Shared Parking
Shared parking may be approved by the zon-
ing administrator if a permanent parking ease-
ment is recorded and is in a form approved by
the city attorney. The number of required park-
ing spaces for any one use may be reduced up
to a maximum of twenty percent of the total
spaces required. Any requested reduction
greater than twenty percent shall be substanti-
ated by calculations based on Urban Land Insti-
tute (ULI) standards and in a manner
acceptable to the city.
d. No Reserved Parking
When more than one business shares park-
ing areas, parking spaces shall not be reserved
for one business to the exclusion of the other
businesses.
e. Property Owners’ Association
All commercial subdivisions shall create a
property owners’ association which shall main-
tain the common parking areas. Provisions
shall be made through the creation of cove-
nants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) for
the continued maintenance of common parking
areas, parking and loading areas, landscaping,
and signage. Owners shall have the right to
access or place a lien upon the individual lot
owners for all necessary costs and/or expenses.
A letter of maintenance responsibility will be
required as part of a zoning clearance proce-
dure. (Ord. 09-147 § I (part))
29.07 Dimensions and Circulation
a. Parking Spaces
Each parking space shall contain a rectangu-
lar area at least twenty feet long (including a
maximum of an eighteen-inch overhang) and
nine feet wide. Lines demarcating parking
spaces shall be drawn as a rectangle one foot
wide by twenty feet long. Such lines shall not
be included in the required parking space
dimensions. Each rectangular demarcation line
may be drawn at various angles in relation to
curbs or aisles, so long as the parking spaces so
created contain within the rectangular area
meet the requirements of this section.
p p p 
8 a a 
r r r 
k k k 
i i 
n n n 
Q II II 
1-FT DEMARCATION 
===PAGE 131===
29.07
75 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 7,  6-09)
b. Parking Aisles
Parking aisle widths shall conform to the fol-
lowing table, which varies the width require-
ment according to the angle of parking:
Not Permitted Design
Permitted Designs
c. Commercial Parking Areas Adjacent
to Residential Districts
Commercial parking areas adjacent to resi-
dential districts and not separated by a public
street shall have installed and maintained a
solid decorative masonry wall six feet in height
on the commercial district boundary line. This
solid decorative masonry wall shall be reduced
to four feet in height when located within the
front yard area of the property abutting a resi-
dential district.
d. Driveways
Driveways shall be provided only at loca-
tions approved by the city engineer and city
planner. Driveways shall not be located less
than thirty feet from any street intersection.
e. Passenger Drop-Off Points
Drop-off points separated from street traffic
and readily accessible without hazardous
maneuvering, shall be provided in conjunction
with the following uses: hotels, motels, hospi-
tals and clinics, educational facilities with fifty
or more pupils, daycare centers, religious facil-
ities with one hundred or more seats, transit ter-
minals, major recreational facilities,
commercial airports, public buildings and
offices and financial services. (Ord. 09-147 § I
(part))
Parking Angle
90º 60º 45º 30º 0º
Required Aisle Width
One-Way Traffic 24 ft. 18 ft. 13 ft. 11 ft. 13 ft.
Two-Way Traffic 24 ft. 23 ft. 21 ft. 20 ft. 19 ft.

===PAGE 132===
29.08
76 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 7,  6-09)
29.08 General Design Requirements
a. Vehicle parking areas shall be designed
such that vehicles shall not exit from the drive-
way by backing onto a collector or arterial
street. This requirement does not apply to park-
ing areas consisting of driveways that serve
single family residential with less than one
hundred-feet of frontage on collector streets.
b. Parking areas shall be designed so that
sanitation, emergency, and other public service
vehicles can serve such developments.
c. Parking areas shall be designed so that
vehicles do not extend beyond the perimeter of
such area onto adjacent properties or public
rights-of-way.
d. All lights used to illuminate commer-
cial, office and industrial parking spaces shall
be installed pursuant to Section 31.15 (Light-
ing). Said lights shall be no greater than eigh-
teen feet in height.
e. Requirements for handicapped parking
and access are required pursuant to Section
29.10 and A.R.S. §41-1492.01 et seq. (Ord. 09-
147 § I (part))
29.09 Parking Area Surfacing 
Improvements
a. All parking areas shall be improved and
paved in a manner that addresses air quality
protection and shall meet the standards adopted
by the city council.
b. Other Than Residential
All persons who are owners, tenants or oper-
ators shall maintain parking, maneuvering,
ingress and egress areas at developments other
than residential buildings with four or fewer
units with one or more of the following dust-
proofing paving methods:
1. Asphaltic concrete;
2. Cement concrete;
3. Penetration treatment of bituminous
material and seal coat of bituminous binder
and a mineral aggregate; and/or
4. A stabilization method approved by the
city.
c. Residential
All persons who are owners, tenants or oper-
ators shall maintain parking, maneuvering,
ingress and egress areas that are three thousand
square feet or more in size at residential build-
ings with four or fewer units with a paving or
stabilization method authorized by a permit
issued by the city engineer. (Ord. 09-147 § I
(part))
29.10 Handicapped Parking
Handicapped parking shall comply with the
requirements of the Americans with Disability
Act, including all regulations adopted pursuant
to that act, and to the following.
a. Each parking area is required to have
accessible (handicap) parking spaces.
b. Accessible parking spaces must be the
closest spaces to the building’s accessible
entrance.
c. Accessible spaces must be at least
eleven feet wide with a clearly marked adjacent
access aisle of sixty inches. Two spaces may
share a common aisle.
d. The access aisle must connect directly to
the accessible route.
e. Accessible parking spaces and parking
aisles must be level with no slope greater than
1:50.
f. All accessible parking spaces shall be
designated with an unobscured vertical sign
that shows the universal symbol of accessibil-
ity and references A.R.S. §28-881 et seq.
===PAGE 133===
29.11
76-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 7,  6-09)
g. Number of Accessible Parking Spaces
Per Number of Total Spaces in Lot
(Ord. 09-147 § I (part))
29.11 Parking Restrictions for Residential 
Uses
Off-street parking is prohibited except on
paved driveways and paved, designated park-
ing spaces. Every structure or part thereof here-
after erected, any building concerted to such
uses or occupancy or any addition thereto shall
be provided on the premises accessible off-
street parking as follows:
a. Dwellings
Calculation of the required number of park-
ing spaces for all types of dwellings shall be as
shown in the matrix in Section 29.13 including
fractions of spaces rounded to the next whole
space. In addition, the following restrictions
apply:
1. Single-Family Dwellings and Town
Houses
A minimum two-car garage shall be pro-
vided for each dwelling unit. Driveways and
parking spaces shall be contiguous and shall
comply with the following requirements:
A. The maximum allowable total drive-
way(s) entry width shall equal: thirteen + (0.2
x front property line lot width) feet.
B. The maximum allowable paved front
yard area that may be utilized for driveways or
parking spaces shall equal: (maximum allow-
able total driveway(s) entry width) x (depth of
the front setback, measured at a ninety-degree
angle from the front property line to the front
setback line) in square feet.
C. Driveways shall be connected to
garages by a paved driveway.
D. Parking spaces and driveways shall be
paved. Parking spaces or driveways paved in
materials other than asphalt or concrete shall
be durably marked and designated and require
administrative approval.
E. Parking spaces in a sidestreet side yard
shall be limited to the garage apron and one
additional space not required to be contiguous.
F. Parking space(s) may be located in only
one side yard.
G. Circular driveways may be discontigu-
ous from other paved areas in front or side
yards.
2. Multiple-Family Dwellings
Three parking spaces for every two dwell-
ing units. Paving surfaces shall be limited to
concrete or asphalt.
A. Efficiency units in a multiple-family
dwelling: one and one-quarter parking spaces
for each efficiency unit.
B. Multiple-family dwelling units with one
or two bedrooms shall provide two parking
spaces per unit, and two and a half spaces shall
be required for three or more bedroom multiple
family units, plus one guest parking space per
five dwelling units.
C. Boardinghouses, lodging houses, frater-
nity and sorority houses and other such uses:
one parking space for each one guest room or
dwelling unit. (Ord. 09-147 § I (part))
29.12 Off-Street Loading Requirements
In all zoning districts, for every building or
part thereof erected or enlarged after the effec-
tive date of the ordinance codified in this sec-
tion, which is occupied by a use receiving or
distributing materials or merchandise by motor
Total Parking In Lot Min. # of Accessible 
Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 and over 3 + 1 space/50 spaces
===PAGE 134===
29.13
76-2 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 7,  6-09)
truck, there shall be provided and maintained
on the same premises as the building or use,
adequate off-street loading space meeting the
minimum requirements hereinafter specified.
Loading space shall not be considered as satis-
fying requirements for off-street parking space.
a. Schedule of Loading Space Require-
ments
b. Location
Required off-street loading space shall not
be permitted in any front yard, or in any
required side yard except in a nonresidential
district where a side yard abuts an alley. Off-
street loading space may occupy all or any part
of a required rear yard, except as otherwise
required for screening or buffering from neigh-
boring uses, and may be partially or entirely
enclosed within a building.
c. Alleys
Where a building or use in a nonresidential
district abuts an alley, such alley may be used
as maneuvering space for loading and unload-
ing spaces; provided, however, that no alley
abutting any residential district may be so used.
d. Size
Every required off-street loading space shall
have a minimum width of twelve feet, a mini-
mum length of forty-five feet and a minimum
height of fourteen feet, exclusive of access
aisles and maneuvering space. (Ord. 09-147 §
I (part))
29.13 Parking Matrix
Total Floor Area of 
Building
Number of Loading 
Spaces Required
20,000 sq. ft. to 30,000 
sq. ft.
1 space
30,001 sq. ft. to 50,000 
sq. ft.
2 spaces
For each 100,000 
additional sq. ft.
1 additional space
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Use (current code) Required Spaces
(current code) Proposed Additional Uses
Automobile Sales Lot – New or 
Used
1/200 sq. ft. of building
1/10 outdoor vehicle display 
spaces
Bowling Alleys 4/bowling lane + 1/employee on 
largest shift
2/billiard table
1/5 seats in visitor’s gallery
Business Schools 1/150 sq. ft. gross floor area
Child Care Center 1/200 sq. ft. gross floor area
Churches 1/4 fixed seats in main 
auditorium or 1/30 sq. ft. floor 
area
Does not include Sunday School 
and special rooms
===PAGE 135===
29.13
76-3 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 7,  6-09)
Commercial 1/200 sq. ft. gross floor area
Medical Office 1/150 sq. ft.
Pharmacy 1/75 sq. ft.
Grocery Store 1/150 sq. ft.
Office Buildings 1/200 sq. ft. gross floor area
Community or Recreation 
Buildings
1/200 sq. ft. gross floor area
Dance Halls, Skating Rinks, 
Similar
1/300 sq. ft. gross floor area
Dwellings
Single-Family 2-car garage minimum/dwelling 
unit
Townhouse 2-car garage minimum/dwelling 
unit
+ 1 guest space/5 dwelling units
Multiple-Family 2 spaces per 1- and 2-bedroom 
dwelling units; 2.5 spaces per 3-
bedroom dwelling unit
+ 1 guest space per 5 dwelling 
units
Efficiency Units in Multiple-
Family
1-1/4 /each efficiency unit
Boarding House 1/guest room or dwelling unit
Lodge Houses 1/guest room or dwelling unit
Fraternity and Sorority 
Houses
2/guest room or dwelling unit
Elementary Schools 1/staff + 1/3 seats in public 
assembly
Funeral Homes 1/3 seats in the viewing room
+ 1/30 sq. ft. public assembly
+ 1/funeral service vehicle
+ 1/employee
Furniture Store over 25,000 sq. 
ft.
1 sq. ft. parking/1 sq. ft. retail 
floor area
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces (Continued)
Use (current code) Required Spaces
(current code) Proposed Additional Uses
===PAGE 136===
29.13
76-4 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
Golf Course
Public 1/200 sq. ft. building floor area
1/2 practice tees in driving range
4/each green in the playing area
Private/Semi-Private 1/200 sq. ft. building floor area
2/each green in the playing area
High School 1/each staff
1/3 students or
1/each 3 seats in public assembly 
area
Hospitals 1/each bed
+ 1/employee on largest shift
+ 30 for emergency room 
services
Hotels and Motels 1/guest room or unit
Residential Health Care 
Facilities
Family Group Homes 1 parking space per adult 
residing in the home. 2 of the 
required parking spaces may be 
on the adjacent street unless 
otherwise posted. If a garage is 
used to meet this requirement, it 
shall not be used in a manner that 
would prevent parking in the 
garage.
Minimal Care Facilities 7 pa rking spaces per 10 dwelling 
units or 0.7 parking spaces per 
each dwelling unit
+ 1 space per employee at peak 
shift
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces (Continued)
Use (current code) Required Spaces
(current code) Proposed Additional Uses
===PAGE 137===
29.13
76-4a (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
Structured Sober Living 
Homes
1 parking space per resident and 
1 parking space per peak staff. 2 
of the required parking spaces 
may be on the adjacent street 
unless otherwise posted. If a 
garage is used to meet this 
requirement, it shall not be used 
in a manner that would prevent 
parking in the garage.
Resort Hotels 4/5 space/guest room or unit
+ 1/3 employees @ peak shift
Resort Hotel, Hotel and Motel 1 /50 sq. ft. restaurant, dining 
rooms, bars and dance areas
+ 20% employees
Auxiliary Standards 1/400 sq. ft. commercial uses
1/5 fixed seats or 1/100 sq. ft. 
assembly
(public assembly parking may be 
reduced by 1 for every 4 guest 
rooms)
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces (Continued)
Use (current code) Required Spaces
(current code) Proposed Additional Uses
===PAGE 138===
29.13
76-5 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 7,  6-09)
Manufacturing and Industrial 1/500 sq. ft. floor area
Parks and Open Space 3/acre or 1/3 adult patrons and 
employees at peak hour use for 
public or private outdoor 
recreation uses
Plant Nurseries, Building 
Material Yards, Equipment 
Rental or Sales Yards and 
Similar Uses
1/300 sq. ft. of sales and display 
area
Post Offices on Private 
Property
1/200 sq. ft. gross floor area
Restaurants, Cafes, Bars, 
Cocktail
(part of a larger center where 
shared parking and restrooms, 
cross access agreements exist)
1 space per 50 sq. ft. floor area, 
excluding hallways, restrooms, 
storage areas, equipment rooms, 
kitchens, and outdoor seating 
areas.
1 space per 150 sq. ft. kitchen 
and employee service areas
1 space per 150 sq. ft. outdoor 
seating area
w/ drive-through
100 linear feet of queuing 
exclusive of aisles
75 linear feet for each 
additional drive-through
Restaurants, Cafes, Bars, 
Cocktail
(stand-alone, not part of larger 
center)
1 space per 50 sq. ft. floor area w/ drive-through
100 linear feet of queuing 
exclusive of aisles
75 linear feet for each 
additional drive-through
Theaters, Auditoriums, 
Gymnasiums and Similar 
Public Assembly
1/400 sq. ft. or 1/3 seats + 
1/employee on largest shift
Warehousing or Wholesaling 1/500 sq. ft. of sales or display 
area
+ 1/1000 sq. ft. storage
+1/300 sq. ft. of retail or office
minimum of 4 spaces
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces (Continued)
Use (current code) Required Spaces
(current code) Proposed Additional Uses
===PAGE 139===
29.14
76-6 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
(Ord. 18-227 § 1 (part); Ord. 09-147 § I (part))
29.14 Violation; Penalties
Any person found guilty of violating any
provision of this section shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Section 8 of the Litchfield
Park Zoning Code. Each day that a violation
continues shall be a se parate offense punish-
able as herein described. (Ord. 09-147 § IV)
Tennis Clubs
Public 1/200 sq. ft. of building
3/each court
(applicant must reserve space for 
parking in order to be permitted 
to hold tournaments)
Private or Semi-Private per above or other available 
parking provided by owner 
within 300'
Handicapped
Multiple Dwellings, 
Commercial, Retail, Office, 
Manufacturing, 
Warehousing, Recreation, 
etc.
1/25 spaces for first 75 spaces
+ 1/50 for 76 spaces and over
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces (Continued)
Use (current code) Required Spaces
(current code) Proposed Additional Uses
===PAGE 140===
30.01
77 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 8,  8-10)
SECTION 30
WALLS, LANDSCAPING AND FENCES
Subsections:
30.01 Gateway Treatments
30.02 Height and Design
30.03 Right-of-Way or Easement
30.04 Property Owner Responsibility
30.05 Landscaping Design Standards 
and Requirements
30.05-01 Purpose and Applicability
30.05-02 Definitions
30.05-03 Single-Family District 
Standards
30.05-04 Multifamily Districts
30.05-05 Nonresidential/Resort Districts
30.01 Gateway Treatments
Combinations of landscaping, monumenta-
tion signs and masonry walls may be approved
by the design review board at locations where
appropriate. Privately-constructed entry signs
may be placed on public property, subject to the
prohibitions of Section 30.03, upon obtaining
conditional and/or temporary approval from
the city. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
30.02 Height and Design
a. The height of walls and fences shall be
measured vertically from the finished grade on
each side of the wall or fence. Raising the fin-
ished grade by placing fill solely for the pur-
pose of adding additional height to a wall or
fence is prohibited. If a wall or fence is placed
on a berm, the height shall be measured verti-
cally from the base of the berm. The maximum
height of walls and fences shall be six feet,
except as set forth below: 
1. Tennis court fences shall not exceed fif-
teen feet in height. 
2. Where the structure has a load-bearing
function, such as earth retention, a masonry
wall is required and shall be properly engi-
neered. Retaining walls shall not exceed eight
feet in height.
3. Within the front yard setbacks of resi-
dential lots, walls and fences shall not exceed
three feet in height and shall be set back from
the front property line a distance equal to or
greater than one-half the depth of the front yard
setback, except a wall or fence not to exceed
three feet in height may extend along the side
property line to the front property line.
4. In side yards of residential lots, from the
midpoint of the side yard building wall to the
front yard, walls and fences shall not exceed
three feet in height, except the design review
board has authority to approve a wall or fence
up to six feet in height from the midpoint of the
side yard building wall elevation to a point set
back at least ten feet from the front yard.
5. In cases where a corner lot abuts a key
lot, the fence or freestanding wall over three
feet but not more than six feet in height on the
corner lot shall be set back from the street side
property line not less than one-half the depth of
the required front yard. 
b. The design of walls and fences con-
structed after June 6, 2007, shall comply with
the following requirements:
1. Walls and fences shall be masonry or
metal grill. Masonry walls or fences shall be
finished on the exterior side of the fence or
wall. The minimum standard for the exterior
side finish of a masonry wall or fence is stucco
and paint, except the design review board may
vary this requirement to provide design com-
patibility with nearby architectural elements. If
the person constructing the wall or fence is not
able to obtain reasonable access to adjoining
===PAGE 141===
30.03
77-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 8,  8-10)
property in order to comply with this require-
ment, that person shall not be required to com-
ply with this subsection.
2. In residential districts, walls and fences
on rear lot lines adjoining golf courses, public
pathways and parks shall be full view walls or
full view fences.
3. In residential districts, walls and fences
on side yard property lines adjoining golf
courses, public pathways or parks shall be par-
tial view walls or partial view fences.
4. In resort and open space districts, walls
and fences separating golf courses from
adjoining residential districts shall be full view
walls or full view fences.
5. Tennis court fences may be chain link.
c. Construction of walls and fences after
June 6, 2007, requires a building permit issued
by the city. No building permit shall be issued
until the wall or fence has received design
review board approval.
d. The design of any gate installed after
March 6, 2009, shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Gates shall be wood, metal grill, or a
combination thereof. A gate shall have a
design compatible with or complementary to
the attached building, wall or fence. 
2. Tennis court gates may be chain link, if
the tennis court is fenced by a chain link fence.
3. Within the front yard setbacks of resi-
dential lots, gates shall not exceed five feet in
height.
e. A gate installed as part of the construc-
tion of a new wall or fence shall be approved as
part of the process set forth in subsection c of
this section. (Ord. 09-146 § 1; Ord. 07-128 § 1
(part); Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
30.03 Right-of-Way or Easement
A masonry wall, as herein defined, is
required, and shall be properly engineered,
where the structure has a load-bearing function
such as earth retention. No wall or fence may
be placed upon any street, walkway or access.
(Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
30.04 Property Owner Responsibility
Each property owner shall landscape and
maintain all property abutting streets or rights-
of-way. Property owners must provide a wall or
fence around a swimming pool as stipulated in
the city building codes.
30.05 Landscaping Design Standards and 
Requirements
(Ord. 10-156 § 1 (part))
30.05-01 Purpose and Applicability
a. The purpose of these landscaping stan-
dards is to implement the goals of the general
plan, to preserve the natural beauty of the area,
to enhance the beauty of the city, to preserve
and enhance the value of land and buildings in
the city, to provide for Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality PM-10 dust mitigation
and to protect the quality of the city’s environ-
ment. 
b. The landscape requirements set forth in
this subsection shall apply to all new develop-
ment, redevelopment or building expansion
(greater than twenty-five percent of gross
building area) projects in the city after August
6, 2010, and to uses where there is a substantial
modification to the existing use.
c. Each property owner shall landscape
and maintain such landscaping on his property
and on property abutting streets or rights-of-
way in compliance with the requirements set
forth in this section. (Ord. 10-156 § 1 (part))
===PAGE 142===
30.05-02
77-2 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 8,  8-10)
30.05-02 Definitions
Arizona Department of Water Resources
Plant Materials List  means the list of low-
water-use/drought-tolerant plants published by
the Arizona Department of Water Resources.
Caliper means the diameter of a tree, in
inches, measured four feet above finished
grade or adjacent ground.
Common Open Space means land within or
related to a development, not individually
owned or dedicated for public use, which is
designed and intended for the common use or
enjoyment of the residents of the development
and may include such complementary struc-
tures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate. Common open space does not
include private or public street rights-of-way.
Drought Tolerant/Low-Water-Use means
a landscaping method that maximizes the con-
servation of water by the use of site and cli-
mate-appropriate plants and an efficient
watering system.
Foundation Planting means the area of a lot
within ten feet of the foundation of any struc-
ture where landscaping can be used to visually
buffer the impact, create visual interest and
enhance the architectural details of the struc-
ture.
Groundcover, Vegetative means living
landscape materials characterized by horizon-
tal as well as vertical growth but which gener-
ally do not exceed eighteen inches in height.
The intent of groundcovers, when properly
installed, is to form a continuous cover over the
ground.
Groundcover, Nonvegetative means land-
scape materials that are not living. These mate-
rials include, but are not limited to,
decomposed granite, gravel, crushed rock,
boulders, river rock, synthetic turf or other sim-
ilar materials. Pavement shall not be consid-
ered groundcover for the purposes of this
section.
Hardscape means any inorganic materials
intended and maintained for decorative use as
part of an overall landscape design and may
include, but not be limited to, decorative rock,
granite, stones, river rock, pavers, patterned
concrete and similar materials.
Irrigation/Irrigation System means an
overall system of various components, includ-
ing pipelines, sprayers, bubblers, drip emitters
and other materials, including timers, designed
and installed to ensure that all landscaped areas
and plant materials are adequately watered on
a regular basis. An irrigation system shall
include a backflow prevention device. An irri-
gation system does not include the use of por-
table sprinklers, hoses, or hand watering.
Landscape Buffer means a landscape area
located on the perimeter of a site, typically on
the interior, that serves to screen the visual and
noise impacts caused by differences in use.
Landscape Material means any materials,
vegetative and nonvegetative, used for the pur-
pose of landscape improvements which may
include, but shall not be limited to, the follow-
ing: trees, shrubs, groundcovers, turf, vines,
berms, nonvegetative groundcover materials,
irrigation equipment, fences and walls.
Landscape Plan means a graphic represen-
tation of a development site, residential or non-
residential, indicating the location of existing
and proposed landscape improvements to be
present on the site at the completion of the con-
struction of the project. 
Landscaping means the planting and con-
tinuous maintenance of a combination of trees,
shrubs, vines, groundcovers, and turf on a prop-
erty. Landscaping includes the installation of
===PAGE 143===
30.05-03
77-3 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 8,  8-10)
various decorative features, such as water fea-
tures and sculptures and the use of hardscape as
part of an overall design. Landscape includes
the use of xeriscape design, techniques, plant-
ing, and irrigation.
Maintenance means the process of keeping
a landscape healthy, clean, safe and attractive
by landscape irrigation management, general
care of landscape areas including, but not lim-
ited to, weeding, erosion control and revegeta-
tion, turf care, pest control, and maintenance of
site enhancement features such as fountains
and sculptures.
Multiple Trunk or Multi-Trunk Tree
means a tree with more than one main trunk. To
be considered a multiple trunk tree, additional
trunks should originate either from the soil line
or no higher than twelve inches above ground.
Any tree that has additional trunks higher than
twelve inches are not considered multiple trunk
trees.
Net Land Area means for all districts, the
area of a lot or parcel that remains after sub-
tracting area necessary for a legal structure,
required parking and driveways, sidewalks and
any other hard-surface improvements.
Palm Tree means a vertical palm that can
reach twenty feet or greater in height at matu-
rity.
Plant Material means all vegetative land-
scaping material.
Required Landscape Areas
a. For single-family districts: 
1. The area between the front, rear and
side property lines and the respective front,
rear and side of the building, unless such areas
are enclosed by an opaque fence meeting the
requirements of Section 2.04.
2. Common open space designated on sub-
division plats.
3. Property abutting streets and rights-of-
way.
b. For multifamily districts, the areas
required to be landscaped pursuant to Section
30.05-04. 
c. For commercial, industrial and resort
districts, the areas required to be landscaped
pursuant to Section 30.05-05.
Shrub means a woody plant which has sev-
eral stems that rise from the ground level.
Tree means a woody plant that has a single
or multiple trunk(s) at ground level.
Turf means continuous plant coverage con-
sisting of grass species that is mowed to main-
tain an established, common height. (Ord. 10-
156 § 1 (part))
30.05-03 Single-Family District Standards
a. Landscaping in required landscape
areas shall be installed prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the property. In
lieu of installation of landscaping prior to issu-
ance of a certificate of occupancy, a cash
deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit in an
amount of one hundred fifty percent guarantee-
ing the completion of landscaping within three
months may be accepted by the zoning admin-
istrator, or his designee. Failure to install the
landscaping in the three-month time period
shall be a violation of this section and the city
may use the cash deposit or funds set aside by
letter of credit to complete the required land-
scaping. An extension, not to exceed three
months, to this requirement may be requested,
in writing, addressed to the zoning administra-
tor explaining the extenuating circumstances
that exist that would support the request.
b. All required landscaped areas must be
covered with any combination of vegetative
and nonvegetative landscape materials.
===PAGE 144===
30.05-04
77-4 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 8,  8-10)
c. Landscaping shall include a combina-
tion of groundcover(s), shrub(s) and tree(s).
d. Landscaping, and irrigation systems if
necessary, shall be installed and properly main-
tained on all portions of single-family residen-
tial lots open to view from a public street not
used for buildings, vehicle access or parking.
1. Decomposed granite is permitted; how-
ever, if used, a minimum of twenty-five per-
cent shall be vegetative landscape material at
maturity and/or synthetic turf. 
2. Trees and shrubs should be species that
are regionally appropriate and suitable for site-
specific conditions, including water conserva-
tion, sun and heat exposure, soil pH and other
environmental factors.
3. Paving materials, water features and
sculptures may be included as landscape
design materials to create useful open space.
The addition of color and texture to the design
is encouraged to create visual interest. Such
materials may not cover more than twenty per-
cent of the required landscaped area.
4. Underground automatic irrigation sys-
tems are encouraged for landscaping which
cannot survive on natural precipitation. The
use of drip, emitter or other water conservation
irrigation methods is encouraged. The overall
irrigation system design should emphasize
efficient water use and conservation. (Ord. 10-
156 § 1 (part))
30.05-04 Multifamily Districts
a. A landscape plan prepared to the stan-
dards outlined in this section must be submitted
for design review board approval prior to issu-
ance of a building permit.
b. Landscaping in required landscape
areas shall be installed prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the property. In
lieu of installation of landscaping prior to issu-
ance of a certificate of occupancy, a cash
deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit in an
amount of one hundred fifty percent guarantee-
ing the completion of landscaping within three
months may be accepted by the zoning admin-
istrator or his designee. Failure to install the
landscaping in the three-month time period
shall be a violation of this section and the city
may use the cash deposit or funds set aside by
letter of credit to complete the required land-
scaping. An extension, not to exceed three
months, to this requirement may be requested,
in writing, addressed to the zoning administra-
tor explaining the extenuating circumstances
that exist that would support the request.
c. Required Landscaping and Mainte-
nance
1. An average fifteen-foot-wide land-
scaped area is required along all interior prop-
erty lines. Trees with a minimum size of
twenty-four-inch box (two-inch caliper) shall
be planted in a manner as to provide a buffer to
adjacent single-family residential property. A
six-foot-high masonry wall is required along
interior property lines.
2. Along public street frontages, an aver-
age twenty-foot-wide landscape area is
required and shall incorporate minimum fif-
teen-gallon-sized trees in a manner that pro-
vides a buffer as to mitigate the spillage of
light and noise onto and off the property. A
minimum of twenty-five percent of the
required trees shall be twenty-four-inch box
(two-inch caliper) size. Open space areas along
public street frontages shall receive special
landscaping treatment to provide a lush setting
for both the residents of the project and the
general public. The following standards shall
apply to landscaping of public street frontages:
===PAGE 145===
30.05-05
77-5 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 8,  8-10)
A. Special entry features shall be provided
at major entrances into a project to provide a
sense of identification and uniqueness.
B. Walls, planters, and earth berms shall
be provided in the front yard to add variety to
the landscape and to increase privacy for the
residents.
C. No more than fifty percent of the
required front yard landscaped area may be
used for stormwater retention purposes.
3. Within common open space, minimum
twenty-four-inch box (two-inch caliper) sized
trees shall be planted at a ratio of one tree per
dwelling unit.
4. Foundation plantings shall be utilized to
complement building elevations, provide
shade, and increase privacy. A minimum of
fifty percent of the building frontage facing
public streets shall have foundation plantings.
5. Landscaped parking islands within
parking areas shall be installed at least every
twelve consecutive parking spaces. Trees shall
be of a variety that minimizes tree litter drop,
interference with vehicle and pedestrian move-
ment and degradation of surrounding pave-
ment. Such space shall be a minimum of five
feet wide and contain at least one twenty-four-
inch box (two-inch caliper) sized tree.
6. All landscaping shall be maintained in a
neat and orderly manner and in a healthy grow-
ing condition appropriate to the season. Land-
scaping and irrigation systems shall be
installed and properly maintained on all por-
tions of the property open to view from a pub-
lic street not used for buildings, vehicle access
or parking. Dead plants shall be removed and
replaced within forty-five calendar days.
7. The maintenance of landscaping in the
public right-of-way shall be the responsibility
of the adjacent property owner per Section
30.04 of this code.
8. Soil not required to be landscaped shall
be stabilized in a manner approved by the city
engineer. At a minimum this shall require com-
pliance with all applicable PM-10 standards
for fugitive dust. (Ord. 10-156 § 1 (part))
30.05-05 Nonresidential/Resort Districts
a. A landscape plan prepared to the stan-
dards outlined in this section must be submitted
for design review board approval prior to issu-
ance of a building permit.
b. Landscaping in required landscape
areas shall be installed prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the property. In
lieu of installation of landscaping prior to issu-
ance of a certificate of occupancy, a cash
deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit in an
amount of one hundred fifty percent guarantee-
ing the completion of landscaping within three
months may be accepted by the zoning admin-
istrator or his designee. Failure to install the
landscaping in the three-month time period
shall be a violation of this section and the city
may use the cash deposit or funds set aside by
letter of credit to complete the required land-
scaping. An extension, not to exceed three
months, to this requirement may be requested,
in writing, addressed to the zoning administra-
tor explaining the extenuating circumstances
that exist that would support the request.
c. Required Landscaping and Mainte-
nance
1. A minimum of ten percent of net land
area of any site located in a commercial district
shall be landscaped. A minimum of five per-
cent of net land area of any site located in an
industrial district shall be landscaped. Addi-
tional required landscape areas may be
===PAGE 146===
30.05-05
77-6 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 8,  8-10)
required in a rezoning ordinance or approved
site plan.
2. Landscaping is required along the street
frontage between the street or sidewalk and
any buildings, parking areas, loading or stor-
age areas in accordance with the following
standards: 
A. Required landscape areas along public
street frontages shall be contoured or bermed
to provide variations in grade, visual relief,
parking lot screening, and a more pleasing aes-
thetic value. All on-site parking areas shall be
screened from street view by a landscaped
berm or decorative wall not less than four feet
in height. The required height of the berm or
wall shall be measured from the highest fin-
ished grade of the adjacent on-site parking
area. 
B. The intersections of arterial or section
line streets are a dominant feature of the urban
landscape, serving as major focal points of
activity in the community. Because of the
importance of these intersections, additional
landscaped setbacks and design features,
beyond the required minimum standards, may
be required on property at these intersections
by the city at the time of rezoning and/or site
plan approval. Such additional features may
involve:
1. Wider setbacks; 
2. Unique building orientation and design; 
3. Special landscape features such as foun-
tains, walls, and screening devices; 
4. Unique building architecture. 
C. Required yards fronting on a public
street in the commercial districts shall be
entirely landscaped, excluding driveways and
walkways. In industrial districts the following
landscaped setbacks shall apply to any build-
ing site: 
1. Along section-line arterial streets,
required yards shall be entirely landscaped; 
2. Along all other streets, a ten-foot land-
scaped yard shall be required;
3. All street frontage landscaping located
adjacent to driveway exits and street intersec-
tions shall be designed, installed, and main-
tained in accordance with the height, location,
and sight visibility at street intersection
requirements.
D. Where existing buildings or nearby par-
cels are built to the street property line, land-
scaping may be modified or located elsewhere
on approval of the zoning administrator. 
3. Any part of a site not used for buildings,
parking, driveways and sidewalks shall be
landscaped.
4. An automatic irrigation system shall be
provided to all landscaped areas requiring
water. 
5. All landscaped areas adjacent to vehic-
ular parking and access areas shall be protected
by six-inch vertical concrete curbing in order
to control stormwater flows and minimize
damage by vehicular traffic. 
6. All trees and plant material used are rec-
ommended to conform to the Arizona Depart-
ment of Water Resources plant material list,
with the exception that the following tree vari-
eties shall be prohibited per City Code Section
11-4-2: 
A. Mulberry trees.
B. Olive trees with the exception of the
Swan Hill and/or other pollenless and fruitless
varieties. 
7. Fifteen-gallon trees shall have a mini-
mum trunk height of eight feet, with a mini-
mum two-inch caliper measured four feet
above the ground. Multi-trunk trees may have
smaller average caliper measurements. 
===PAGE 147===
30.05-05
77-7 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 8,  8-10)
8. Twenty-four-inch box trees shall have a
minimum trunk height of ten feet with a mini-
mum two-inch caliper measured four feet
above the ground. Multi-trunk trees may have
smaller average caliper measurements. Palms
shall have a minimum trunk height of eight
feet. 
9. Inorganic ground cover, specifically
decomposed granite, shall be one-fourth-inch
minus in all arterial and collector right-of-way
landscaping areas. 
10. All shrubs shall be a minimum of five
gallons in size. 
11. Twenty-five percent of the required
number of trees may be substituted with palm
trees. All Mexican fan palms (Washingtonia
robusta), California fan palms (Washingtonia
filifera), date palms (Phoenix dactylifera), and
queen palms (Cocos plumosa) shall have a
minimum five-foot trunk height measured
from the base of the trunk to the base of the
fronds when located within the public right-of-
way or within fifty feet of the street property
line.
12. Upon approval of the zoning adminis-
trator, the installation of twenty square feet of
vegetative groundcover in any required land-
scape area shall substitute for one required
shrub, up to a maximum of thirty percent of the
required shrubs in any particular landscaped
area.
13. Soil not required to be landscaped shall
be stabilized in a manner approved by the city
engineer. At a minimum this shall require com-
pliance with all applicable PM-10 standards
for fugitive dust.
14. Maneuvering areas shall not be permit-
ted in the required landscape areas with the
exception of driveway access to parking across
the required landscape area and walkways
across and along the required landscape area.
15. A minimum of five percent of the park-
ing area, exclusive of front yard or perimeter
landscaping and street trees, shall be required
landscape area located in parking islands. The
parking islands shall be located within the
perimeter of the parking lot. 
16. Parking islands shall be installed at least
every twelve consecutive parking spaces; such
islands shall be a minimum of five feet wide
and contain a minimum of fifty square feet in
area. A minimum of one tree shall be provided
for every parking island. Trees shall be of a
variety that minimizes tree litter drop, interfer-
ence with vehicle and pedestrian movement
and degradation of surrounding pavement.
17. All parking areas shall be separated
from adjacent residential uses or districts by a
ten-foot landscaped strip. Trees with a mini-
mum size of twenty-four-inch box (two-inch
caliper) shall be planted in a manner as to pro-
vide a buffer. A six-foot-high masonry wall is
required along all interior property lines.
18. The front setback area of commercial
(nonresidential) properties may be used for
maneuvering but shall not be allowed for park-
ing of vehicles. Any landscaped area used for
vehicular overhang shall not be counted
towards the required landscaping. 
19. Permanent containment barriers (con-
crete curbs or bumper guards) shall be installed
and properly secured within or adjacent to all
proposed parking areas and along all drive-
ways and vehicular access ways to prevent the
destruction of landscape materials by vehicles.
20. The city recommends the use of low-
water-consumptive plants indigenous to this
region as set forth in the Arizona Department
of Water Resources plant materials list. 
===PAGE 148===
30.05-05
77-8 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 8,  8-10)
21. A minimum of twenty-five percent of
all frontage landscaped areas shall be covered
with vegetative or organic ground cover con-
sisting of living plant materials characterized
by horizontal growth which generally does not
exceed eighteen inches in height. 
22. Vegetative ground cover shall be so
located to accentuate landmarks or focal points
on a site and to create a “lush” appearance to
the landscaped area from public streets and
areas. 
23. All required landscape areas shall be
finished with a natural topping material which
may include, but not be limited to, the follow-
ing: turf, groundcover, planting, decomposed
granite (two inches minimum depth), river run
rock, expanded shale, or bark. A pre-emergent
treatment shall be applied to the ground prior
to the placement of natural surface materials
(decomposed granite, river run rock, etc.) in
any landscaped area to prevent weed growth.
24. All landscaped areas requiring irriga-
tion shall be supported by an automatic irriga-
tion system which may be a spray, flood,
soaker, or drip type system. All irrigation sys-
tems and landscaped areas shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained so as to promote
water conservation and prevent water overflow
or seepage into the street, sidewalk, or parking
areas.
25. Foundation planting is required adja-
cent to buildings fronting on public streets. A
minimum of thirty-three percent of the build-
ing frontage shall be landscaped, with a mini-
mum width planter area of three feet excluding
vehicle overhang. 
26. All portions of a site not occupied by
buildings, structures, vehicle access and park-
ing areas, loading/unloading areas, and
approved storage areas shall be landscaped.
Future building pads within a phased develop-
ment shall be improved with temporary land-
scaping or otherwise maintained weed-free in
such a manner as may be approved by the zon-
ing administrator.
d. Obstructions to Visibility on the Pub-
lic Right-of-Way
All landscaping and landscaping materials
installed on public right-of-way or on private
property in proximity to a driveway or street
intersection shall be installed and maintained in
compliance with the sight visibility require-
ments.
1. Shrubs and ground covers shall be
maintained at height no greater than two feet.
2. Trees shall be trimmed and maintained
as to prevent branching and leaves to project
no closer than seven feet from finished grade.
e. Street Right-of-Way Landscaping
The landscaping of all street rights-of-way
contiguous with the property not used for street
pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, or drive-
ways shall be required in addition to the on-site
landscaped areas.
f. Retention Basins
1. All private retention basins in commer-
cial and industrial projects shall be landscaped.
Such basins may not occupy more than fifty
percent of any landscaped area fronting on a
public street; except, where exceptional design
or shallow depths are proposed for the reten-
tion basin, the zoning administrator may per-
mit a greater use of the frontage landscaped
area. 
2. Retention basins shall be contoured and
designed as an integral part of any frontage
landscaping and shall not take on the appear-
ance of a ditch. Maximum side slopes of basins
shall be a four to one (4:1) ratio; side slopes of
six to one (6:1) are preferred. 
===PAGE 149===
30.05-05
77-9 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 8,  8-10)
g. Maintenance
1. All landscaping shall be maintained in a
neat and orderly manner and in a healthy grow-
ing condition appropriate to the season. Land-
scaping and irrigation systems shall be
installed and properly maintained on all por-
tions of the property open to view from a pub-
lic street not used for buildings, vehicle access
or parking. Dead plants shall be removed and
replaced within forty-five calendar days. The
code compliance officer may extend the time
for replacement an additional forty-five days
for good cause shown.
2. The maintenance of landscaping in the
public right-of-way shall be the responsibility
of the adjacent property owner, whether an
individual, corporation, or homeowner’s asso-
ciation. (Ord. 10-156 § 1 (part))
===PAGE 150===
31.01
78 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
SECTION 31
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Subsections:
31.01 Intent
31.02 Special Height Regulations
31.03 Accessory Uses and Structures
31.04 Screening of Non-Principal Uses
31.05 Structures in Yard Areas
31.06 Exceptions to Yard Regulations
31.07 Porches and Patios
31.08 Yard Regulations for Cluster 
Residences
31.09 Temporary Buildings
31.10 Distance Between Buildings
31.11 Storage
31.12 Adjustments of Yard 
Regulation
31.13 Safety Considerations
31.14 Prohibition of Time-Share 
Projects
31.15 Lighting
31.16 Drainage
31.17 Group Living Facilities
31.18 Yard Sales
31.19 Environmental Concerns
31.20 Pathway Improvement 
Standards
31.21 Medical Marijuana
31.22 Solar Energy Collector Panels
31.23 Wireless Facilities in the Right-
of-Way
31.24 Recreational Marijuana
31.01 Intent
The regulations hereinaf ter set forth in this
section qualify or supplement, as the case may
be, the regulations appearing elsewhere in this
code.
31.02 Special Height Regulations
a. Purpose
The purpose of this code is to promote the
safe installation, operation and visual and aes-
thetic compatibility within the community of
projections, appurtenances, mechanical equip-
ment, antennas and other similar structures
which project skyward. Due to certain safety
risks, such as lightning strikes or other natural
phenomena, the placement and specifications
of such structures are of importance to protect
citizens of the commun ity. Furthermore, the
placement of such structures, particularly on
residential property, has a significant impact on
views from surrounding property and alters the
open character of front, side, and rear yards.
The following requiremen ts establish reason-
able standards for use and enjoyment of projec-
tions, appurtenances, m echanical equipment,
antennas and other similar structures which
project skyward and promotes their safe and
aesthetic compatibility with surrounding prop-
erty.
b. General
Structures governed by this section shall
meet all applicable codes, be of noncombusti-
ble and corrosive resistant material and shall be
erected in a secure, wind resistant manner.
Every such structure shall be adequately
grounded for protection against a direct strike
of lightning.
c. Location and Screening
Except as provided in subsection d of this
section, projections, appurtenances, mechani-
cal equipment, antennas and other similar
structures which project skyward are permitted
in all districts subject to the following condi-
tions:
1. Such structures sha ll not be located on a
vacant lot.
===PAGE 151===
31.03
79 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 10, 6-11)
2. Such structures shall be located and
designed so as to not be visible from an adjoin-
ing street or from surrounding properties at the
same or lower elevation as the subject prop-
erty.
3. In addition, such structures shall satisfy
the following requirements:
A. Ground-mounted structures shall:
I. Be placed in the rear yard;
II. Not project into the required wall set-
backs;
III. Not be greater than eight feet in height
above the natural grade including any platform
upon which such structure is mounted;
IV. Be screened by walls, opaque fencing,
dense landscaping or natural terrain; and
V. Be camouflaged with paint to reason-
ably blend with their surroundings.
B. Roof-mounted structures shall:
I. Not expose a surface area, including
supporting structures, of more than five square
feet;
II. Not exceed twenty-five feet in height
above the natural grade or three feet in height
above the highest point of the roof line, which-
ever is lower;
III. Not be located nearer to the roof edge or
eave than its projecting height;
IV. Be placed on the rear half of the roof;
V. Be screened by an integral part of the
building and not a parapet or other screen
added merely to comply with this section; and
VI. Be camouflaged with paint to reason-
ably blend with their surroundings.
d. Exceptions
1. Section 31.02 shall not apply to wireless
communications facilities or roof-mounted
chimneys on a building which are an architec-
tural component of the principal building.
2. Upon showing of necessity, a land-
owner may obtain a use permit to erect a struc-
ture which does not satisfy all of the
requirements of paragraph c. provided:
A. Failure to satisfy the specific require-
ment does not pose an unreasonable safety risk
to the landowner or the community;
B. Any ground-mounted structure shall not
exceed twelve feet in height above the natural
grade;
C. Any roof-mounted structure shall not
exceed thirty-three feet in height above the nat-
ural grade or six feet in height above the high-
est point of the roof line, whichever is lower;
D. Such structure shall not expose a sur-
face area, including supporting structures,
greater than twenty-five square feet; and
E. The landowner satisfies such other rea-
sonable conditions which may be imposed to
assure compatibility with surrounding prop-
erty including location, color, type, landscap-
ing and screening requirements.
3. A showing of necessity shall include
that a specific requirement in paragraph C. ren-
ders the structure unusable or inoperable or
imposes excessive costs in light of the pur-
chase and installation costs of the structure.
4. Approval and Appeal
Prior to installation, the zoning administra-
tor shall review and approve every structure
governed by this subsection for compliance.
Appeals shall be made to the board of adjust-
ment. (Ord. 97-44 § 1 (part))
31.03 Accessory Uses and Structures
a. General
1. Accessory Structures Permitted
Accessory structures are permitted only as
provided in this section.
2. Construction
No accessory structure shall be constructed
upon a lot until the construction of the princi-
pal building has commenced.
===PAGE 152===
31.03
80 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 14, 9-13)
3. All activity (except required on-site
parking, loading or unlo ading) including inci-
dental or accessory storage and display area
shall be within a completely enclosed building,
unless specifically noted herein.
b. Uses
1. Storage accessory structures shall be
used solely for storage uses.
2. Habitable accessory buildings shall
only be used (A) for a guesthouse to be used by
family, owner’s domestic help or temporary
guests of the owner or lessee of the principal
building, (B) for noncommercial workshops or
(C) for pool cabanas. Guesthouses shall have
on-site parking, shall not be leased separately
from the principal building, shall not have sep-
arate utility connections, and shall not have
cooking facilities.
3. Accessory structures other than habit-
able accessory structures shall not contain toi-
lets.
c. Location
Habitable accessory structures are permitted
only in single-family residential districts. Other
accessory structures are permitted in all dis-
tricts, subject to requirements of this subsection
and requirements applicable to the zoning dis-
trict in which the accessory structure is located.
d. Setbacks
1. Except as otherwise provided in subsec-
tions (d)(2) through (8) of this section, acces-
sory structures shall be located between the
rear property line and the principal building
and shall be set back at least five feet from the
rear and side property lines and at least ten feet
from the principal building.
2. Screened accessory structures one hun-
dred twenty square feet or less in size may
have a zero setback.
3. Accessory structures with a height
greater than the height of an opaque perimeter
fence but ten feet in height or less shall be set
back from property lines at least five feet.
4. Accessory structures more than ten feet
in height shall be set back from property lines
five feet plus one foot for every foot of height
over ten feet (step back).
5. For corner lots, accessory structures
shall be set back the required side street set-
back distance.
6. Storage accessory structures used as a
garage and located on an alley shall be set back
not less than four feet from the rear property
line and are not subject to step back require-
ments in subsection (d)(4) of this section.
7. Shade accessory structures other than
tents may be located between the side setback
line and the principal building and when
located as such shall comply with the setback
requirements for the principal building.
8. Guesthouses may be located in the area
between the side yard setback line and the prin-
cipal building and between the front yard set-
back line and the prin cipal building and when
located as such shall comply with the setback
requirements for the principal building.
9. Rear setbacks on properties with side
yard view fences shall be equal to or greater
than the length of the view fence portion of the
side yard wall.
e. Height
Accessory structures shall not exceed the
height of the principal building or fifteen feet
in height, whichever is less.
f. Lot Coverage; Size
No accessory structure or combination of
structures shall occupy more than twenty-five
percent of the area lying between the rear of the
principal building and the rear property line or
exceed five hundred square feet in area, which-
ever is less. No accessory structure shall cause
===PAGE 153===
31.04
80-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 25, 6-23)
the maximum lot coverage applicable to the lot
to be exceeded.
g. Architecture
Design of accessory structures shall be com-
patible with the principal building with respect
to color, materials and form. Accessory struc-
tures except for screened accessory structures
shall be subject to design review board
approval.
h. Building Permit
A building permit is required for all habit-
able accessory structures and all other acces-
sory structures occupying one hundred twenty
square feet or more. (Ord. 13-188 § 1; Ord. 11-
163 § 1)
31.04 Screening of Non-Principal Uses
a. Except as provided in Litchfield Park
City Code Section 9-5-5(H) for temporary
parking of recreational vehicles on residential
lots, recreational vehicles, boats, trucks, buses,
utility trailers, or other non-building or land-
scaping equipment shall be stored only in the
side or rear yard and only in accordance with
the following:
1. Such items shall be completely
screened from view of adjacent and nearby
properties and the pub lic rights-of-way and
parks by a wall or fence not to exceed six feet
in height and/or dens e landscaping, to ensure
the equipment is comp letely screened from
view. Dense landscaping is not subject to
height limitations.
2. Nothing in this se ction shall prohibit
suburbans, vans, sport utility vehicles, and
pickup trucks, excludin g attached trailers,
from parking on reside ntial lots in a front
driveway.
b. No new mechanical devices shall be
installed, replaced or structurally altered except
in compliance with this subsection. As used
herein, the term “mechanical devices” shall
include air conditioners , evaporative coolers
and all similar devices and structures.
c. New mechanical devices shall be
ground-mounted and screened from view with
materials the same as th e wall of the building
which the device serves or with shrubbery.
d. Replacement mechanical devices shall
be screened from view with similar materials
and color as the wall or roof of the building
which the device serves , or with vegetation if
ground-mounted. (Ord. 23-266 § 1; Ord. 07-
132 § 1 (part); Ord. 05-105 § 1)
31.05 Structures in Yard Areas
Every part of a required yard space (residual
from maximum lot coverage) shall be open to
the sky.
31.06 Exceptions to Yard Regulations
Open lattice-enclosed  fire-proof outside
stairway, and balconies opening upon fire tow-
ers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys
and flues into the requir ed rear yard not more
than five feet are permitted.
31.07 Porches and Patios
An open unenclosed porch not more than
one story in height or paved terrace may project
into the required front yard. An enclosed vesti-
bule containing not more than forty square feet
may project into the required front yard.
Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and
ornamental features which do not extend more
than three feet above the floor level of the
ground (first) story may project in a required
yard, provided these projections be distant at
least five feet from the adjacent side lot line.
===PAGE 154===
31.08
80-2 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 14, 9-13)
31.08 Yard Regulations for Cluster 
Residences
For the purpose of the side yard regulations,
a two-family dwelling or a multiple dwelling
shall be considered as one building occupying
one lot.
31.09 Temporary Buildings
Temporary buildings that are used in con-
junction with construction work only may be
permitted in any district during the period that
the building is being constructed, but such tem-
porary buildings shall be removed upon
===PAGE 155===
completion of the construction work, or upon 
the expiration of a period of one year from the 
time of erection of such temporary buildings, 
whichever is sooner. 
31.10 Distance Between Buildings 
In the event that a lot is to be occupied by 
a group of two or more related buildings to be 
used for institutional or hotel purposes, there 
may be more than one main building on the 
lot; provided, however, that open spaces be­
tween buildings shall have a minimum dimen­
sion of thirty feet. 
Where an open space is more than fifty per­
cent surrounded by a building the minimum 
width of the open space shall be at least forty 
feet. 
31.11 Storage 
Buildings that are to be used for storage 
purposes only may exceed the maximum 
number of stories that are permitted in the 
district in which they are located, but such 
buildings shall not exceed the number of feet 
of building height pennitted in such district. 
Note: This section does not apply to single 
family residential districts. 
Exterior storage of recreational vehicles, 
trucks, buses, and other non-accessory items 
in excess of twenty three feet will not be 
peIIDitted in single-family residential districts. 
31.12 Adjustments of Yard Regulation 
Front yards heretofore established shall be 
adjusted in the following cases: 
a. Where forty percent or more of the 
frontage on one side of the street between two 
intersecting streets is developed with buildings 
that have observed (with a variation of five 
feet or less) a front yard greater in depth than 
81 
31.09 
herein required, new buildings shall not be 
erected closer to the street than the average 
front yards so established by the existing 
buildings. 
b. Where forty percent or more of the 
frontage of one side of a street between two 
intersecting streets is developed with buildings 
that have observed a front yard as described 
above, then: 
1. Where a building is to be erected on a 
parcel of land that is within one hundred feet 
of existing buildings on both sides, the mini­
mum front yard shall be line drawn between 
the two closest front comers of the adjacent 
buildings on the two sides; or 
2. Where a building is to be erected on a 
parcel of land that is within one hundred feet 
of an existing building on one side only, such 
building may be erected as close to the street 
as the existing adjacent building. 
31.13 Safety Considerations 
As an aid to freer safe movement of vehi­
cles at and near street intersections with other 
streets, cart paths and pedestrian ways and in 
order to promote more adequate protection for 
the safety of children, pedestrians, and opera­
tors of vehicles, there shall be limitations on 
the height of fences, walls, gateways, orna­
mental structures, hedges, shrubbery and other 
fixtures, construction and planting on corner 
lots in all districts where front yards are re­
quired. 
Such barriers to clear, unobstructed vision 
at comers of intersecting streets shall be limit­
ed to a height of not over three feet above the 
established elevations, for a distance of fifty 
feet along both the front and side lot lines and 
as appropriate at other intersections. 
===PAGE 156===
31.14
82 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
31.14 Prohibition of Time-Share Projects
Time-share projects are not allowed in sin-
gle-family residential districts.
31.15 Lighting
Any lighting shall be in accordance with the
city code and is intended to conserve energy to
reduce unnecessary aura in the night sky and to
encourage new lighting technology which is
useful in reducing light above the horizontal.
All outdoor light fixtures, permanent or porta-
ble, shall be fully shielded so as to project their
emitted rays below a hor izontal plane running
through the lowest part of the fixture where
light is emitted.
a. Exemptions: The following illuminat-
ing devices are exempt from full shielding
requirements; incandescent fixtures of 75 watts
or less located no higher than seven feet above
finished grade; interior-illuminated signs, fos-
sil fuel fixtures.
b. Prohibitions: The following fixtures or
uses are prohibited: searchlights; outdoor light-
ing for recreational facilities between 10:00
p.m. and sunrise; mercury vapor fixtures.
31.16 Drainage
Provisions for on-site stormwater retention
and drainage, off-site storm water drainage
both entering and leaving the property and any
other surface water not disposable through the
sanitary waste disposal system shall be made so
as to limit on-site water storage to a period not
to exceed forty-eight hours, and to meet or
exceed such other applicable standards as may
be required by the Maricopa County Flood
Control District.
31.17 Group Living Facilities
a. Purpose
1. The purpose of these regulations is to
permit persons with a disa bility to reside in a
residential neighborho od in compliance with
the Fair Housing Act while preserving the res-
idential character of the neighborhood and pre-
venting a concentration of such facilities in any
particular area to avoid institutionalizing a
neighborhood.
2. The purpose of a gr oup living facility is
to emulate a biological family to (A) normalize
its residents and integr ate them into the sur-
rounding community; or (B) to provide an
opportunity for persons with a disability to
reside in a family at mosphere in a neighbor-
hood setting. 
b. General
1. A group home for the developmentally
disabled with a maximum of six residents, not
including staff, is allowed in a residential area
as mandated by A.R.S. § 36-582.
2. Group living facilities shall be sepa-
rated by minimum distance of one thousand
two hundred feet as measured by a straight line
in any direction from the nearest property line
of the proposed group living facility to the
nearest property line of the existing group liv-
ing facility. This separa tion is presumed to be
a reasonable accommod ation; provided, how-
ever, such presumption may be rebutted by
substantial evidence of the following:
A. If traffic generated by the existing and
proposed group living facility would be using
the same residential streets, the cumulative
effect of such traffic on the public safety and
residential character of the neighborhood may
justify a greater separation. Likewise, a lesser
separation may be appropriate if traffic gener-
ated by the proposed group living facility nor-
mally would not be using the same residential
streets as the existing group living facility.
===PAGE 157===
31.17
83 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
B. If the existing and proposed group liv-
ing facilities are separated by a significant
intervening physical feature, such as an arterial
street, park, golf course, church, school or
other similar buffering feature or development,
a lesser separation may be appropriate.
3. The group living facility shall comply
with garbage and trash collection regulations
(City Code Chapter 9). The city may require a
group living facility to dispose of its own
wastes or schedule more frequent trash
removal, as needed.
4. There shall be no exterior indication of
a group living facility visible from the street or
public sidewalk and the appearance of the
exterior of the group living facility shall be
consistent with the residential character of the
neighborhood.
5. No group living facility shall house any
person whose tenancy would constitute a direct
threat to the health or safety of other persons or
would result in substantial physical damage to
the person or property of others.
6. Group living facilities shall comply
with all city codes, ordinances, and regula-
tions, including fire and building code regula-
tions, except as may be exempted by the
federal or state Fair Housing Act.
7. Upon request by the applicant, a group
living facility may be allowed an individual-
ized exception from compliance with any of
the conditions of this section or any other
applicable code provision, but only if the city
determines that such ex ception is required by
the federal and state Fair Housing Acts or other
applicable law and is reasonable and does not
cause undue financial or administrative hard-
ship for the city.
8. Changes in Federal or State Law
In the event federal or state laws are
amended so as not to require this use in a resi-
dential zoning district, any use established pur-
suant to this section shall cease.
c. Family Group Homes
In addition to the requirements set forth in
subsection b of this section, family group
homes shall comply with this subsection c.
1. A maximum of eight residents per
home, not including staff, is permitted.
2. Application
A. At least fifty days prior to beginning
operations, a completed application form shall
be submitted to the planning and zoning
department on a form established by the plan-
ning services director. 
B. The applicant shall provide a current
license, certification or registration required
for the family group home by any state or fed-
eral agency. 
C. The applicant shall provide any
requested individualized exception from com-
pliance with group living facilities require-
ments.
D. The group living facility shall provide
to the city written notice of any changes in the
name, address and telephone numbers of both
the operators and owners of the group living
facility; type of group living facility and state
licensing agency; total number of residents;
number of nonambulatory residents; or sus-
pension or revocation of the permittee’s state
license. Such information shall be provided
within fifteen days of such change.
3. Approval of Application
A. The planning services director shall
make a final decision regarding the application
within seven working da ys of the filing of a
complete application.
B. The family group home shall become
operational upon approval of the application
by the planning services director and shall ter-
minate when the family group home use
ceases. 
===PAGE 158===
31.17
84 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
4. Revocation of Approval
A written decision approving a family group
home use may be revoked or suspended at any
time upon failure to co mply with the condi-
tions of this section or failure to comply with
individualized conditions or exceptions pro-
vided for in the written decision. The zoning
administrator shall act as follows:
A. Notice of the time, date and place of a
hearing, including a general explanation of the
matter to be considered, shall be sent by regis-
tered mail to the operator of the family group
home and posted on the affected property at
least fifteen days before the hearing. The
notice shall state that anyone wanting to pro-
test may appear in person or by writing.
B. At the hearing, the zoning administrator
shall review items of concern. The operator of
the family group home and any residents
thereof shall have the opportunity to present
evidence of compliance, or reasons for non-
compliance and efforts to cure the same.
C. Within ten days following the hearing,
the zoning administrator shall issue a written
decision based on substantial evidence to
revoke or suspend the approval of a family
group home use for noncompliance, allow con-
tinued operation of the family group home
upon finding substantial compliance, or in his
discretion allow continued operation of the
family group home pending the filing of a new
application for approval. Upon revocation of
approval, operations of the family group home
shall cease within a time reasonably necessary
to provide for relocation of residents.
5. Appeal to Board of Adjustment
A. Any aggrieved person may appeal the
zoning administrator’s written decision of
revocation within ten days from the date of the
written decision. An appe al shall stay all pro-
ceedings. An appeal shall be filed with the city
clerk and be accompanied by the following
items and such other evidence prescribed by
the board:
I. Any alleged error in  an order, require-
ment or decision made by the zoning adminis-
trator in the enforcement of the zoning
ordinance; and
II. The requested relief; and
III. Any other materials appellant wishes to
have considered.
B. Upon receipt of such an appeal by the
city clerk, the zoning administrator shall
immediately notify the board of adjustment
and forward all records pertaining to the deci-
sion appealed to the board of adjustment.
C. The board of adjustment will follow the
public hearing and no tice requirements and
general procedures for appeals as provided for
pursuant to Section 3.02(g).
D. At the public hearing the board of
adjustment shall review the appeal, all records
pertaining to the zoning  administrator’s deci-
sion, and any other public comments or mate-
rials submitted.
E. The board of adjustment shall issue a
written decision within ten days following the
public hearing. The bo ard of adjustment may
reverse or affirm wholly  or partly, or modify
the order, requirement or decision of the zon-
ing administrator appealed from, and make
such order, requirement, decision or determi-
nation as necessary.
F. A decision of the board of adjustment
may be reconsidered or further reviewed in a
court of law pursuant to Section 3.02(j) and
under Arizona law.
d. Structured Sober Living Homes
In addition to the requirements set forth in
subsection b of this section, structured sober
living facilities shall comply with this subsec-
tion d.
1. A use permit shall be obtained in com-
pliance with Section 33. The use permit may
===PAGE 159===
31.17
85 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
be issued only if the proposed structured sober
living home meets the following standards:
A. There shall be a maximum of two resi-
dents per bedroom, not including staff. There
shall be at least one three-quarter bathroom for
every two residents and staff. All bathrooms
shall be located within the house.
B. The applicant demons trates that the pro-
posed use will not interfere with the normaliza-
tion and community integration of the
residents of any existing group living facility
and that the presence of other group living
facilities will not interfere with the normaliza-
tion and community integration of the resi-
dents of the proposed structured sober living
home.
C. The applicant demons trates that it will
operate the proposed st ructured sober living
home in a manner sim ilar to that ordinarily
required by state licensing to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the occupants of the pro-
posed home.
D. The applicant demons trates that the pro-
posed structured sober living home, in combi-
nation with existing group living facilities, will
not alter the residential character of the sur-
rounding neighborhood by creating an institu-
tional atmosphere or by creating a de facto
social service district by concentrating group
living facilities on a bloc k or in a neighbor-
hood.
E. As a function of emulating a biological
family, a structured sober living home shall
have an established protocol to assure that its
residents have access to meals at the home
whether the residents dine individually or as a
group. Public, charitable or social services pro-
vided meals shall not be a substitute for these
protocols.
2. A business license shall be obtained
pursuant to City Code Article 8-5 prior to com-
mencement of operation of the structured sober
living home.
3. Revocation of Use Permit
A use permit for a structured sober living
home may be revoked or suspended at any time
upon failure to comply  with the conditions of
this section, City Code Article 8-5 or failure to
comply with individualized conditions or
exceptions provided for in the written decision.
The procedures set forth in Section 33.03 shall
apply.
e. Reasonable Accommodation
1. If a group living facility owner believes
any requirement of the zoning code prevents
the establishment of his group living facility in
an economically viable  manner or imposes a
regulation not permitted by the Fair Housing
Act, the owner shall submit to the zoning
administrator a written request for reasonable
accommodation setting fo rth the request and
the reasons why th e accommodation is
required. The written request shall contain suf-
ficient facts to allow the zoning administrator
to make an individualized determination of the
group living facility’s needs, to address safety
and welfare concerns of the residents, the city,
and the public, and to assure compliance with
this section.
2. The zoning administrator shall review
the written request and determine:
A. Whether an accommodation should be
made pursuant to the requirements of the Fair
Housing Act; and
B. If so, the nature of  the accommodation
taking into considera tion the requirements of
the Fair Housing Act, safety and welfare of the
residents, the city, and the public, and preserv-
ing the residential character of the neighbor-
hood; and
C. Any accommodation made shall be only
to the extent necessary to comply with the Fair
Housing Act.
===PAGE 160===
31.18
85a (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 26, 11-23)
3. The zoning administrator shall make
findings of fact and shall render his decision in
writing. The zoning administrator may meet
with and interview the applicant to ascertain or
clarify information suffi ciently to make the
required findings. To grant a reasonable
accommodation, the app licant shall have the
burden of showing and the zoning administra-
tor shall affirmatively find all of the following:
A. The proposed group living facility can
and will emulate a biological family and func-
tion as a residential use ra ther than an institu-
tional or other nonresidential use.
B. The proposed group living facility
needs the requested accommodation for finan-
cial or therapeutic reasons.
C. The proposed group living facility will
not interfere with the normalization and com-
munity integration of the residents of any
existing group living facility and that the pres-
ence of other group living facilities will not
interfere with the no rmalization and commu-
nity integration of the residents of the proposed
group living facility.
D. The applicant will operate the group liv-
ing facility in a manner similar to that ordi-
narily required by state licensing to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the occupants of
the proposed group living facility.
E. The proposed group living facility, in
combination with any existing group living
facility, will not alter th e residential character
of the surrounding neighborhood by creating
an institutional atmosphere or by creating a de
facto social service district by concentrating
group living facilities on a block or in a neigh-
borhood.
f. Enforcement; Penalties
1. A violation of any provision of this sec-
tion is punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
by a base fine not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars, plus statutory assessments, or
by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment
in accordance with state law. Each day any
violation of any provision of this section exists
shall constitute a separate violation punishable
as hereinabove described.
2. Violations of this section are in addition
to any other violation enumerated within the
city code and in no way limit the penalties,
actions, or abatement procedures which may
be taken by the city for any violation of this
section, which is also a violation of any other
ordinance or code provision of the city or fed-
eral or state law. Conviction and punishment or
judgment against any person under this section
shall not relieve such person from the respon-
sibility of correcting prohibited conditions and
shall not prevent the enforced correction
thereof. (Ord. 23-272  § 1; Ord. 18-227 § 1
(part))
31.18 Yard Sales
The owner or occupant of a lot in a residen-
tial district may conduct no more than two yard
sales in any calendar year. A sign permit for the
yard sale is required pursuant to Section 35,
Signs, Section 35.08, Temporary Signs. A yard
sale shall not exceed three consecutive days.
This section shall not apply to yard sales spon-
sored by the city. (Ord. 16-207 § 1; Ord. 00-61
§ 1 (part))
31.19 Environmental Concerns
In accordance with general plan policies,
proposals submitted for approval by the city
council, planning an d zoning commission,
design review board or board of adjustment
shall indicate measures or techniques to be
included in construction of improvements
which will aid in the conservation of water,
===PAGE 161===
31.20
85b (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 26, 11-23)
energy and clean air. Such environmental pres-
ervation methods may include, but are not lim-
ited to the following: xeriscape, drought-
resistant plant materials and turf limitations in
landscape plans; integration of circulating heat
pumps, solar receptors and low water use fix-
tures in structures; battery chargers or alterna-
tive fuel stations in parking lots; and such other
devices as may from time-to-time be proposed
by developers and/or recorded on an “environ-
mental concerns” checklist maintained by the
city. New uses shall be  evaluated with the
intent to reduce negative impacts on current or
future natural resour ces in the community.
(Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
31.20 Pathway Improvement Standards
Pathways shall be constructed of the
approved colored concrete or other paved sur-
face ten feet in width, unless otherwise modi-
fied by the city. Unless dedication is accepted
by the city, the property owner(s) shall main-
tain the
===PAGE 162===
31.21
85-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
pathway surface and keep it free of obstruction
from vegetation or other impediment, includ-
ing a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet
above the pathway surface. Planned pathway
improvements shall include signage and light-
ing plans approved by the city. (Ord. 04-91 § 1
(part))
31.21 Medical Marijuana
a. General
1. The requirements of this section shall
apply to all medical marijuana dispensaries,
medical marijuana dispensary cultivation loca-
tions, medical marijuana designated caregiver
cultivation locations and medical marijuana
qualifying patient cultiva tion locations in the
city. In addition, these requirements shall also
apply to recreational marijuana establishments
and recreational marijuana testing facilities as
permitted in Section 31.24 to the fullest extent
allowable by law.
2. Medical marijuana dispensaries, medi-
cal marijuana dispensary cultivation locations,
medical marijuana designated caregiver culti-
vation locations, medical marijuana qualifying
patient cultivation locations, recreational mar-
ijuana establishments and recreational mari-
juana testing facilities shall be operated in
accordance with state, county and city laws,
codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
b. Medical Marijuana Dispensaries;
Recreational Mariju ana Establishments,
and Recreational Marijuana Testing Facili-
ties
1. Applications for medical marijuana dis-
pensaries, recreational marijuana establish-
ments, and recreational marijuana testing
facilities shall be submitted to the planning
department and shall include:
A. If the application is by someone other
than the owner of the property, an authoriza-
tion signed by the property owner and an
explicit acknowledgement that the property
owner knows that the proposed use of the prop-
erty is for a medical marijuana dispensary, rec-
reational marijuana establishment and/or
recreational marijuana testing facility.
B. The address and legal name of the med-
ical marijuana dispensary, recreational mari-
juana establishment and/or recreational
marijuana testing facility.
C. The name, address and contact informa-
tion of all persons who are authorized as own-
ers, agents, volunteers and employees of the
medical marijuana dispensary, recreational
marijuana establishment and/or recreational
marijuana testing facility, including emer-
gency contact information for one or more reg-
istered agents responsible for the operation of
the facility.
D. The name(s) and location(s) of any cul-
tivation locations associated with the medical
marijuana dispensary or recreational mari-
juana establishment.
E. A copy of the operating procedures for
the medical marijuana dispensary adopted in
compliance with state law including but not
limited to A.R.S. § 36-2804(B)(1)(c).
F. A floor plan showing the layout and
dimensions of the medical marijuana dispen-
sary, recreational marijuana establishment
and/or recreational marijuana testing facility to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements
set forth in this section  and show the security
measures proposed to comply with state law
requirements including A.R.S. § 36-2806, the
standards contained in this section, and any
additional requirements as may be necessary to
protect against medical marijuana diversion
and theft.
===PAGE 163===
31.21
85-2 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
2. Medical marijuana dispensaries and
recreational marijuana establishments shall:
A. Be located in a permanent building and
shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container,
mobile or modular building, mobile home, rec-
reational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
B. Have a maximum gross floor area not
exceeding two thousand five hundred square
feet.
C. Have a secure storage area not exceed-
ing five hundred square feet of the total of the
two thousand five hundred square feet maxi-
mum gross floor area of the medical marijuana
dispensary or recreational marijuana establish-
ment.
D. Have an interior customer waiting area
equal to twenty-five percent of the gross floor
area.
E. Be open for business only between
eight a.m. and seven p.m.
F. Not have a drive-through service.
G. Not offer a service that provides off-site
delivery of the medical marijuana or recre-
ational marijuana.
H. Not provide outdoor seating areas.
I. Not sell merchandise other than medical
marijuana.
J. Prohibit consumption of medical mari-
juana or recreational ma rijuana on the prem-
ises.
K. Provide unrestricted access to city code
enforcement officers or law enforcement offi-
cers who request admission for the purpose of
determining compliance with these standards.
L. Have on site a secure storage area which
has a single point of access and whose walls
and roof are constructed of materials (eight-
inch concrete block or equivalent) sufficient to
deter and prevent theft of marijuana being pro-
cessed.
M. Assure that all medical marijuana and
recreational marijuana shall be placed within
the secure storage area at any time when the
dispensary is not open for business.
N. Provide for the proper disposal of mari-
juana remnants or by-products, and such mate-
rial shall not be placed within the facility’s
exterior refuse containers.
O. Ensure that there is no emission of dust,
fumes, vapors, or odors into the environment
from the dispensary or recreational marijuana
establishment.
P. Have only one secure entrance to the
dispensary or recreational marijuana establish-
ment and any other door s required for exiting
shall be locked to th e outside and have an
alarm that sounds when opened from the
inside.
Q. Shall have an alarm system with a
redundant power supply and circuitry to pre-
vent deactivation.
R. Shall post and main tain “no loitering”
sign(s) in sufficient quantity, size and location
so that they are clearly visible by anyone in the
immediate vicinity of the entrance or premises.
S. Shall have adequate exterior security
lighting.
T. Limit entry to medical marijuana dis-
pensaries to only those persons who either pos-
sess a valid registration card or need access to
perform their duties in enforcing local, state or
federal laws or regulations. No one under eigh-
teen years of age shall be permitted inside the
dispensary, unless such person is a registered
qualifying patient and is accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian.
U. Develop and mainta in a security plan
which demonstrates compliance with require-
ments set forth in this  section and any addi-
tional requirements as may be necessary to
protect against marijuana diversion and theft.
V. Obtain, maintain and display a valid
city of Litchfield Park business registration or
license as may be required by the city code.
===PAGE 164===
31.21
85-3 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
W. If medical marijuana is supplied to the
dispensary by a qualifying patient or desig-
nated caregiver, provide the name and contact
information of the qualifying patient or desig-
nated caregiver.
X. Within ten days of any change, provide
and update the names and contact information
for all persons who are authorized as owners,
agents, volunteers and employees, to access
the dispensary or recreational marijuana estab-
lishment.
3. Medical marijuana dispensaries and
recreational marijuana establishments shall be
a minimum distance from the uses set forth in
the table below. Measu rements shall be made
in a straight line in any direction from the clos-
est perimeter business walls.
c. Medical Marijuana Dispensary Culti-
vation Locations and Designated Caregiver
Cultivation Locations
1. Unless included in the application for
the associated medical marijuana dispensary at
the same location, the application for a medical
marijuana dispensary cultivation location and
all designated caregi ver cultivation location
applications shall be submitted to the planning
department and shall include:
A. If the application is by someone other
than the owner of the property, an authoriza-
tion signed by the property owner and an
explicit acknowledgement that the property
owner knows that the proposed use of the prop-
erty is for a medical marijuana dispensary cul-
tivation location or a designated caregiver
cultivation location.
B. The address and legal name of the med-
ical marijuana dispensary or designated care-
giver cultivation location.
C. The name(s) and location(s) of any
medical marijuana dispensary associated with
the medical marijuana di spensary cultivation
location.
D. If a medical marijuana designated care-
giver cultivation location, evidence that there
is no medical marijuana dispensary within
twenty-five miles of the caregiver’s qualifying
patient.
E. The name, address and contact informa-
tion of all persons who are authorized as own-
ers, agents, volunteers  and employees of any
medical marijuana dispensary associated with
the medical marijuana di spensary cultivation
location, including emergency contact infor-
mation for one or more registered dispensary
agents responsible for the operation of said
cultivation location.
F. A copy of the operating procedures for
the medical marijuana di spensary cultivation
Use or Use Classification
Separation 
Requirement 
(Feet)
Medical marijuana 
dispensary
1,325
Recreational marijuana 
establishment
1,325
Day care center, public or 
private
1,325
Schools, public or private 1,325
Public park, library or public 
community center
1,325
Place of worship 1,325
Licensed substance abuse 
diagnostic or treatment 
facility or other licensed drug 
or alcohol rehabilitation 
facility
1,325
Sexually oriented business 1,325
Residential district boundary 500
===PAGE 165===
31.21
85-3a (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
location adopted in co mpliance with A.R.S.
§ 36-2804(B)(1)(c).
G. A floor plan showing the layout and
dimensions of the medical marijuana dispen-
sary or designated caregiver cultivation loca-
tion to demonstrate compliance with the
development standards contained herein and
show the security measures proposed to com-
ply with A.R.S. § 36-2806 and the standards
contained herein.
2. Medical marijuana dispensary and des-
ignated caregiver cultivation locations shall:
A. Be located in a permanent building and
shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container,
mobile or modular building, mobile home, rec-
reational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
B. Have a gross floor area not exceeding
five thousand square feet.
C. Have a secure storage area not exceed-
ing one thousand square feet of the five thou-
sand square feet maximum gross floor area of
the medical marijuana dispensary or desig-
nated caregiver cultivation location.
D. Provide unrestricted access to city code
enforcement officers or law enforcement offi-
cers who request admission for the purpose of
determining compliance with these standards.
E. Have a secure storage area which has a
single point of access and whose walls and roof
are constructed of materials (eight-inch con-
===PAGE 166===
31.21
85-4 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 10, 6-11)
crete block or equal) sufficient to deter and
prevent theft of marijuana being processed.
F. If a medical marijuana dispensary culti-
vation location, assure that all marijuana being
processed shall be placed within the secure
storage area at all times when the cultivation
location is not open for business.
G. Provide for the proper disposal of mari-
juana remnants or by-products, and such mate-
rial shall not be placed within the dispensary’s
or designated caregiver’s exterior refuse con-
tainers.
H. Ensure that there is no emission of dust,
fumes, vapors, or odors into the environment
from the cultivation location.
I. Not allow on-site consumption of med-
ical marijuana.
J. Have only one secure entrance to the
dispensary or the designated caregiver cultiva-
tion location and any other doors required for
exiting shall be locked to the outside and have
an alarm that sounds when opened from the
inside.
K. Have an alarm system with a redundant
power supply and circuitry to prevent deactiva-
tion.
L. Have adequate exterior security light-
ing.
M. Limit entry to only the principal offic-
ers, board members and designated agents of
the medical marijuana dispensary or desig-
nated caregiver associated with the medical
marijuana dispensary or designated caregiver
cultivation location or persons who need
access to perform their duties in enforcing
local, state or federal laws or regulations.
N. Develop and maintain a security plan
which demonstrates compliance with all of the
minimum standards specified in this section.
O. Within ten days of any change, provide
and update the names and contact information
for all persons who are authorized as owners,
agents, volunteers and employees, to access
the medical marijuana dispensary or desig-
nated caregiver cultivation location.
3. Medical marijuana dispensary and des-
ignated caregiver cultivation locations shall be
a minimum distance from the uses set forth in
the table below. Measurements shall be made
in a straight line in any direction from the clos-
est perimeter business walls.
d. Medical Marijuana Qualifying
Patient Cultivation Locations
1. Medical marijuana qualifying patient
cultivation is permitted in all residential zon-
ing districts as an accessory use provided the
primary residence of the registered qualifying
patient for whom the medical marijuana is
Use or Use Classification
Separation 
Requirement 
(Feet)
Another medical marijuana 
dispensary or designated 
caregiver cultivation location 
or a medical marijuana 
dispensary if the cultivation 
location is not on a medical 
marijuana dispensary 
premises
1,325
Day care center, public or 
private
1,325
Schools, public or private 1,325
Public park, library or public 
community center
1,325
Place of worship 1,325
Licensed substance abuse 
diagnostic or treatment 
facility or other licensed drug 
or alcohol rehabilitation 
facility
1,325
Sexually oriented business 1,325
Residential district boundary 500
===PAGE 167===
31.22
85-5 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
being cultivated, is mo re than twenty-five
miles from an operating medical marijuana
dispensary and is done in conformance with
the development standards contained in this
section.
2. All medical marijuana qualifying
patient cultivation shall be conducted in con-
formance with the provisions of A.R.S. § 36-
2801 et seq. and any rules adopted by the Ari-
zona Department of Health Services pursuant
to said statutes.
3. Medical marijuana qualifying patient
cultivation shall be co nducted at the primary
residence of a registered qualifying patient
only if that residence is more than twenty-five
miles from an operating medical marijuana
dispensary and shall:
A. Be an accessory use to the primary resi-
dence of the registered qualifying patient and
in conformance with the requirements set forth
in this subsection d.
B. Shall be conducted in an enclosed,
locked facility such as a closet, room, green-
house or other building that does not exceed
fifty square feet.
C. Shall be conducted in such a manner
that it is not detectable from the exterior of the
building in which the cultivation takes place.
(Ord. 21-248 § 1; Ord. 11-166 § 1 (part))
31.22 Solar Energy Collector Panels
*
a. Design review board approval is
required prior to the installation of solar energy
collector panels. The design review board is
authorized to approve deviations from the
design and installation standards set forth in
this subsection if it determines that strict com-
pliance with the standards is impractical or may
approve an alternative proposal if the require-
ments listed under subsection b of this section
cannot be met without significant loss of effi-
ciency.
b. The design and installation of solar
energy collector panels shall be in compliance
with the following standards:
1. Reflective glare of solar energy collec-
tor panels on neighboring properties shall be
minimized by the positioning of the solar
energy collector panels or by the use of non-
glare glazing.
2. Piping, wiring and other mechanical
accessories otherwise visible to the public shall
be fully concealed within the roof or by a roof
mounted solar energy collector panel, unless
this would conflict with manufacturer’s speci-
fications. In the event of such conflict, the pip-
ing, wiring and other mechanical accessories
shall be concealed to the extent practicable.
3. Pitched roof solar energy collector pan-
els shall be subject to  the following require-
ments:
A. Shall be in a flat configuration, be par-
allel to the roof plane and appear to be an inte-
gral part of the building.
B. Should be configured  in a regular quad-
rangular shape, and aligned with the existing
roof edges.
C. Shall be positioned within the field of
the roof plane with a proportional margin of
roof between the panel and the roof edges.
D. The surface of a solar energy collector
panel shall be not more than ten inches above
the surface of the pitched roof.
4. Flat roof solar energy collector panels
shall be positioned within the field of the roof
plane as far from the roof edge as possible and,
if ten inches above roof surface, whether rack
mounted or flat mounted, shall be subject to
the following requirements:
*Ordinance 11-167 added this section as Section 
31.21. It has been editorially renumbered to avoid 
duplication.
===PAGE 168===
31.23
85-6 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
A. Shall be screened from public view.
B. The height of such screening, at mini-
mum, shall be the height of the solar energy
collector panel.
C. The screening may be by a parapet or by
a screening wall replicating the materials of the
building.
5. Ground-mounted solar energy collector
panels shall be subject to the following
requirements:
A. Shall be located in a rear yard.
B. Shall be fully screened from public
view by a surrounding yard wall. (Ord. 11-167
§1  ( p a r t ) )
31.23 Wireless Facilities in the Right-of-
Way
Small wireless facilities are permitted in the
right-of-way in compliance with Litchfield
Park City Code Chapter 18A. All other small
wireless facilities and all new poles in the right-
of-way are required to obtain a use permit prior
to submitting an applic ation for a wireless
facility in the right-of-way. Monopoles are pro-
hibited in the right-of-way. (Ord. 18-223 § 1
(part))
31.24 Recreational Marijuana
a. Purpose
This section is adopted to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of the city.
Nothing in this section is intended to promote
or condone the sale, cu ltivation, manufacture,
transport, production, distribution, possession,
or use of recreational marijuana or recreational
marijuana products in violation of any applica-
ble law.
b. Regulations
1. Recreational Marijuana Establish-
ments and Testing Facilities
It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a
recreational marijuana establishment or recre-
ational marijuana testin g facility at any loca-
tion within the city w ithout first obtaining a
business license from the city and paying fees
for such license as established by resolution of
the city council.
2. Applications
An application to op erate a recreational
marijuana establishment or recreational mari-
juana testing facility shall be filed with the city
in compliance with Section 31.21.
3. Operations; Sale of Marijuana and
Marijuana Products
A. Recreational marijuana establishments
are permitted in industrial zones and shall be
regulated in the same manner as medical mari-
juana dispensaries as set forth in Section 31.21,
except as provided in this Section 31.24.
B. The sale of recreational marijuana and
recreational marijuana products is tangible
personal property as defined in A.R.S. § 42-
5001 and subject to the transaction privilege
tax in the retail classification and use tax.
4. Public Places
A. The use, sale, cultivation, manufacture,
production or distribution of recreational mar-
ijuana or recreational marijuana products is
prohibited on property that is occupied, owned,
controlled, or operated by the city.
B. The use, sale, cultivation, manufacture,
production, or distribution of recreational mar-
ijuana or recreational marijuana products is
prohibited on property that is occupied, owned,
controlled, or operated by the state or a politi-
cal subdivision of this state that has adopted
rules, regulations, or policies prohibiting the
use, sale, cultivation, manufacture, production,
or distribution of recreational marijuana or rec-
reational marijuana products on its property.
C. It is unlawful for an individual to smoke
recreational marijuana in a public place or
open space in the city.
===PAGE 169===
31.24
85-7 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
D. It is unlawful to operate a business in
the city that permits consumption of recre-
ational marijuana or recreational marijuana
products on premises by invitees, patrons, or
employees of the business.
5. Regulations for Primary Residence
for Personal Use
To the extent allowable by law, recreational
marijuana possession, co nsumption, process-
ing, manufacturing, tr ansportation, and culti-
vation are permitted in a residential zoning
district in the city and are subject to the follow-
ing conditions and limitations:
A. It shall be unlawful for any individual
who is at least twenty-one years of age to pos-
sess, transport, cultivate, or process more than
six recreational marijuana plants.
B. It shall be unlawful for two or more
individuals who are at least twenty-one years
of age to possess, transp ort, cultivate, or pro-
cess more than twelve recreational marijuana
plants at the individual’s primary residence.
C. Except as provided by this section and
A.R.S. § 36-2850 et seq., it shall be unlawful
for an individual to cultivate recreational mar-
ijuana in a residential zoning district within the
city limits.
D. Individuals shall not process or manu-
facture recreational marijuana by means of any
liquid or gas, other than alcohol, that has a flash-
point below one hundred degrees Fahrenheit.
E. Kitchen, bathrooms, and primary bed-
room(s) shall be used for their intended use and
shall not be used primarily for residential rec-
reational marijuana processing, manufactur-
ing, or cultivation.
F. A residence shall not emit dust, fumes,
vapors, or odors into the environment and indi-
viduals shall ensure that ventilation, air filtra-
tion, building and design standards are
compatible with adjacent uses and the require-
ments of adopted building codes of the city.
G. Cultivation shall be limited to a closet,
room, greenhouse, or other enclosed area on
the grounds of the residence equipped with a
lock or other security device that prevents
access by minors.
H. Cultivation shall take place in an area
where the recreational marijuana plants are not
visible from public view without using binoc-
ulars, aircraft, or other optical aids.
c. Enforcement; Penalties
1. Except as otherwise provided in A.R.S.
§ 36-2853, violation of any provision of this
section is punishable as a civil violation in
accordance with Section 8. Any person found
responsible for committing three or more vio-
lations of this section within a twenty-four-
month period, whether by admission, by pay-
ment of the fine, by default or by judgment
after hearing shall be determined to be a habit-
ual offender and shall be guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor.
2. Violations of this section are in addition
to any other violation enumerated within the
city code and in no way limit the penalties,
actions, or abatement procedures which may
be taken by the city for any violation of this
section, which is also a violation of any other
ordinance or code provision of the city or fed-
eral or state law. Conviction and punishment or
judgment against any person under this section
shall not relieve such person from the respon-
sibility of correcting prohibited conditions, or
removing prohibited structures or improve-
ments, and shall not prevent the enforced cor-
rection or removal thereof.
3. Recreational marijuana establishment
licenses may be revoked by the city for viola-
tion of any provision of this section or if the
department revokes the license for a recre-
ational marijuana establishment. (Ord. 21-248
§1 )
===PAGE 170===
SECTION32 
NONCONFORMING USES 
Subsections: 
32.01 Continued Use 
32.02 
32.03 
32.04 
Alterations 
Prohibition Against 
Reuse/Discontinuance 
Special Circumstances 
32.01 Continued Use 
A nonconforming use ofland may be con­
tinued unless it is a danger to the public health 
and safety in which case it shall be unlawful 
to make such use ofland, but if it shall be dis­
continued for a period of one year or more, 
any future use shall be in conformity with the 
provisions of this code. 
32.02 Alterations 
No structural alterations of a structure or 
building that is a nonconforming use shall be 
made unless they be required by code or law, 
or permitted under other provisions of this 
code. A nonconforming use, structure or 
building shall not be expanded in area nor in­
creased in intensity except as expressly au­
thorized by other provisions of this code. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
code it shall be unlawful to maintain any ' building, structure or use or land which vio-
lates any section or provision of the zoning 
code of the city of Litchfield Park. 
In the event that the owner of a noncon­
forming structure or building, or structure de­
voted to a nonconforming use shall desire to 
make structural alterations therein, he shall 
make application for use permit approval to 
the board of adjustment for authorization to do 
so. The board may grant such application in 
conformity with the standards set forth in this 
code, or where different standards pertain in 
86 
32.01 
the particular vicinity by reason of continuing 
private deed restrictions, may take such alter­
native standards into consideration when ren­
dering its decisions. Except that the board 
shall not authorize any of the following: 
a. A change in the use to which the struc­
ture is devoted unless such use is more restric­
tive than the nonconforming use existing; 
b. An increase in the size of a structure or 
building on property zoned for residential use 
where the structure or building is or would be 
used, in whole or in part, for a nonresidential 
purpose; or 
c. An alteration to a nonconforming use 
or structure which contains substandard condi­
tions affecting health, safety or welfare, unless 
such nonconformities are corrected to the sat­
isfaction of the building department. (Ord. 04-
91 § I (part)) 
32.03 Prohibition Against 
Reuse/Discontinuance 
If at any time a structure devoted to a non­
conforming use or a nonconforming use struc­
ture or building shall be destroyed by fire, 
explosion, act of God or act of the public en­
emy to the extent of fifty percent of its value, 
the right to use or devote such structure to the 
nonconforming use shall terminate, and future 
use of the structure shall be subject to the pro­
visions of this code. 
Nothing in this article shall authorize the 
continuance of the use of a structure, building 
or premises in violation of any provision of 
this code if such structure, building, or use is 
not a nonconforming use. 
32.04 Special Circumstances 
a. Continuance of nonconforming use 
of land; abandonment 
The lawful use of land existing at the time 
of the passage of this code, although such 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I. 6-05) 
===PAGE 171===
32.04
87 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 9,  3-11)
does not conform to the provisions hereof for
said land, may be continued, but if such non-
conforming use is abandoned, and a non-con-
forming use discontinued for a period of three
months is presumed abandoned, then any
future use of said land shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this code.
b. Continuance of Non-conforming Use
of Building or Land; Change to Another
Non-conforming Use
The lawful use of a building or land existing
at the time of the passage of this code may be
continued, although such use does not conform
with the provisions of this code for such build-
ing or land and such use may be continued pro-
viding only reasonable repairs and alterations
are made. If no structural alterations are made,
a non-conforming use of a building or land may
be changed to another non-conforming use of a
building or land which is for the same or more
restrictive classification, subject to a use per-
mit. Whenever a non-conforming use of a
building or land has been changed to a more
restrictive use or to a conforming use, such use
shall not thereafter be changed to a less restric-
tive use.
c. Non-conforming Use Created by
Change in Zoning Code or District Bound-
aries
Whenever the use of building or land
becomes non-conforming through a change in
the zoning code or district boundaries, such use
may be continued and, if no structural alter-
ations are made, it may be changed to another
non-conforming use of the same or of a more
restrictive classification, subject to a use per-
mit.
d. Abandonment of Non-conforming
Use of Building or Land
In the event that a non-conforming use of
any building is abandoned, and non-conform-
ing use discontinued for a period of three
months is presumed abandoned, then any
future use of said building or land shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this code.
e. Enlargement, Extension, Reconstruc-
tion or Structural Alteration of Building or
Land
No existing building or land designed,
arranged, or intended for or devoted to a use not
permitted under the regulations of this code for
the district in which such building or land is
located shall be enlarged, extended, recon-
structed, or structurally altered unless such
building and such enlargement, extension,
reconstruction, and structural alterations, and
further use hereof conform in every respect
with the regulations specified by this code for
such district in which said building or land is
located, provided nothing herein shall prohibit
any reasonable repairs or alterations to a build-
ing or land used for such existing purposes.
f. Destruction of Non-conforming
Building or Land
If at any time any building or land in exist-
ence or maintained at the time of the adoption
of this code, which does not conform to the reg-
ulations for the district in which it is located
shall be destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God
or act of the public enemy to the extent of fifty
percent of its value as determined by three
competent appraisers, then and without further
action by the council the said building and the
land on which said building was located or
maintained shall from and after the date of such
destruction be subject to all the regulations
specified by this code for the district in which
such land and building are located.
g. Non-Conforming Side Yard Setbacks
in Single-Family Residential Districts
The side yard setback requirements of this
code shall not apply to lots where a single-fam-
===PAGE 172===
32.04
88 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 9,  3-11)
ily dwelling was lawfully constructed prior to
July 1, 1988, and such lot and the dwelling
thereon was subject to side yard setback
requirements contained in a deed restriction,
plat or similar document recorded prior to July
1, 1988. The side yard setback requirements
shall be as set forth in such deed restriction, plat
or similar document.
h. Use in Violation of Previous Zoning
Regulations
Nothing in this code shall be interpreted as
authorization for or approval of the continu-
ance of the use of a building or land in violation
of zoning regulations in effect at the time of the
effective date of this code. (Ord. 11-162 § 1)
===PAGE 173===
33.01
89 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 10,  6-11)
SECTION 33
USE PERMITS
Subsections:
33.01 Purpose
33.02 Review Procedures
33.03 Revocation of Use Permit
33.04 Automatic Termination of Use 
Permit
33.01 Purpose
Each district in the city contains designated
permitted uses. Some uses might not be com-
patible with other uses permitted in a zoning
district unless conditions are imposed to miti-
gate negative impacts surrounding those uses.
In those cases, where permitted in the zoning
matrix, use permits may be issued subject to
conditions and based on compliance with crite-
ria set forth in this section.
It is the intent of this section to provide pro-
cedures and criteria for uses of land and struc-
tures which, because of their unique
characteristics relative to locational features,
design, size, operation, circulation and public
interest or service, require conditions to miti-
gate or eliminate negative impacts on adjacent
properties and the community as a whole. The
purpose of use permits is to:
a. Allow certain uses that would otherwise
not be permitted in a zoning district due to neg-
ative impacts on adjacent uses and the commu-
nity, so long as those uses comply with
conditions of the use permit.
b. Provide the process for periodic review
of use permits to assure conformity of such
uses to the public welfare. (Ord. 11-168 § 1
(part))
33.02 Review Procedures
a. Application
An application for a use permit shall be sub-
mitted on a form prescribed by the city zoning
administrator. The application shall include an
agreement to waive claims for diminution in
value as set forth in Section 3.07.
b. Submittal Requirements
1. Narrative of proposed use with the fol-
lowing information:
A. Detailed description of proposed use.
B. Anticipated number of employees.
C. Hours of operation.
D. Proposed square footage of building or
space to be devoted to the purposed use for
parking calculation purposes.
E. Locations of other uses on adjacent
properties within 300 feet and estimated dis-
tance from those uses.
F. Discussion of each review criterion set
forth in subsection c of this section.
G. Detailed description of subject site’s
and adjacent sites’ zoning and uses.
H. Copy of material safety data sheets
(MSDS) if appropriate for the requested use.
2. Site plan of the proposed site drawn to a
scale. The site plan shall include the following
information:
A. Nearest cross-streets.
B. North arrow.
C. Parking spaces/area.
D. Building where the use will be located.
If the use is proposed to be located within a
new building not designed yet, a stipulation
will be added requiring council approval of the
site plan prior to construction. This will allow
the business owner an opportunity to obtain
approval for the use prior to the expenditure of
money to design the building.
E. Adjacent uses, clearly labeled.
F. Open space areas delineated.
===PAGE 174===
33.02
90 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 10,  6-11)
G. All rights-of-way and easements,
clearly delineated and labeled.
H. Measurements for all features listed
above shall also be included on the plan.
c. Review Criteria
1. The location, size, design and opera-
tional characteristics of the proposed use will
not be detrimental to the health, safety or gen-
eral welfare of the surrounding area and the
community as a whole.
2. The site plan, circulation plan and sche-
matic architectural designs for the use are com-
patible with the character of the surrounding
area relative to scale, height, landscaping,
screening, lot coverage and density.
3. The proposed use shall minimize nega-
tive impacts on existing uses in the area and in
the city. These impacts include, but are not
limited to, the creation of noise, glare, fumes,
dust, smoke, vibration, fire hazard or other
injurious or noxious impacts. The applicant
shall provide adequate mitigation solutions to
the above-identified impacts.
4. The proposed use shall minimize and
mitigate all negative impacts which affect
existing uses in the area and in the city, includ-
ing but not limited to impacts on public infra-
structure and on public services and the ability
of existing infrastructure and service agencies
to adequately provide necessary services.
5. The proposed use shall be in conform-
ance with the city’s general plan, zoning code
and any other statutes, ordinances, codes or
policies that may be applicable.
6. Uses requiring a use permit and marked
with an “*” on the use matrix in Section 28
shall be required to maintain a separation dis-
tance of five hundred feet, measured in a per-
pendicular line from property line to property
line, from a similar use and from the following
types of uses:
A. Residential zoning districts.
B. Schools, public, private or other educa-
tional institution.
C. Churches and other religious use.
D. Child care facilities.
d. Consideration by the Commission
1. All applications for use permits shall be
first considered by the commission at a public
hearing. Notice of the proposed use shall be
mailed to the following persons:
A. All owners of land lying within one
thousand feet of the boundaries of the land
included in the application. For purposes of the
calculation of this notice area, public rights-of-
way shall be excluded in determining the
extent of the notice area;
B. Any person or organization who files
with the zoning administrator a request to
receive such notice upon payment of a reason-
able fee;
C. Applicable adjoining political subdivi-
sions where the property which is the subject
of the application is within five hundred feet of
the city boundary; and
D. Such other persons as the zoning
administrator determines are likely to be
affected by the proposed use.
2. The notice shall contain:
A. A description of the proposed use and
its location; and
B. The place and time of the public hearing
at which comments on the proposed use must
be filed.
3. The commission shall review each
application for compliance with the criteria
and requirements set forth in this section and
forward a recommendation by resolution to the
council.
4. The commission may recommend some
or all of the following conditions to a use per-
mit if it determines the use requires additional
measures to mitigate any negative impacts cre-
===PAGE 175===
33.03
91 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 10,  6-11)
ated by the proposed use, including (but not
limited to):
A. Larger building setbacks.
B. Additional landscaping such as trees
and/or shrubs for visual screening purposes.
C. Additional on-site parking or loading
spaces for traffic-intense uses.
D. Structural height and area limitations.
E. Limited vehicular access.
F. Walls, fences and screening devices (no
chain link fences, slatted or otherwise).
G. Noise attenuation construction.
H. Off-site improvements in public rights-
of-way.
I. Any other restrictions necessary to pro-
tect and preserve adjacent properties.
e. Council Consideration and Action
1. After a public hearing is advertised and
conducted, the council may approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the application for a
use permit. An application shall not be
approved unless the applicant provides evi-
dence substantiating that all the requirements
of the code relative to the proposed use are sat-
isfied, and demonstrates that the proposed use
satisfies the review criteria set forth in subsec-
tion c of this section.
2. The council may include some or all of
the following conditions in a use permit if it
determines the use requires additional mea-
sures to mitigate any negative impacts created
by the proposed use, including (but not limited
to):
A. Larger building setbacks.
B. Additional landscaping such as trees
and/or shrubs for visual screening purposes.
C. Additional on-site parking or loading
spaces for traffic-intense uses.
D. Structural height and area limitations.
E. Limited vehicular access.
F. Walls, fences and screening devices (no
chain link fences, slatted or otherwise).
G. Noise attenuation construction.
H. Off-site improvements in public rights-
of-way.
I. Any other restrictions necessary to pro-
tect and preserve adjacent properties.
3. Written notice of the council’s decision
shall be provided by the zoning administrator
to the applicant.
4. Issuance of a use permit is an adminis-
trative act of the council. (Ord. 11-168 § 1
(part); Ord. 07-134 § 1 (part). Formerly 33.03)
33.03 Revocation of Use Permit
a. Any previously granted use permit may
be revoked by the council, after a hearing con-
ducted in the manner required for approval of
a use permit initially, upon any one of the fol-
lowing grounds:
1. Failure to comply with the conditions of
approval.
2. Discontinuance of the use for a period
in excess of one year.
b. Revocations have the effect of making
the previously granted use permit void until a
new application is submitted and granted. (Ord.
11-168 § 1 (part). Formerly 33.04)
33.04 Automatic Termination of Use 
Permit
a. Unless otherwise provided by the coun-
cil in the resolution granting approval of the use
permit, a use permit shall automatically
become null and void one year after the effec-
tive date upon which it was granted unless one
of the following events occur:
1. The applicant or his successor in inter-
est has secured a building permit within said
one-year period, if a building permit is
required, and has actually commenced con-
struction of the building or structure authorized
by the permit within said one-year period.
===PAGE 176===
33.04
91-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 10,  6-11)
2. The applicant or his successor in inter-
est has commenced the activity or installation
of the facility or structure authorized by the use
permit within said one-year period.
b. The applicant may submit a request to
the council for an extension of time on the use
permit to avoid the permit’s becoming null and
void. The request for extension must be filed
with the city clerk prior to the expiration of the
time established by subsection a of this section.
The council may, in the resolution granting
such use permit, provide for an extension of
time beyond one year. (Ord. 11-168 § 1 (part).
Formerly 33.05)
===PAGE 177===
34.01
92 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 4,  2-08)
SECTION 34
VARIANCES
Subsections:
34.01 Application
34.02 Findings and Actions by the 
Board of Adjustment
34.03 Alternative Prevailing 
Standards
34.01 Application
An application for a variance from the pro-
visions of this code shall be made to the board
of adjustment on its prescribed form. The appli-
cation shall be filed with the city clerk and be
accompanied by the following items and such
other evidence prescribed by the board:
a. Plans and descriptions sufficient to indi-
cate the nature of the project involved and the
proposed use with ground plans and elevations
of all proposed buildings; together with esti-
mate of cost.
b. Evidence satisfactory to the board of the
ability and intention of the applicant to proceed
with actual construction work in accordance
with said plans within six months after issuance
of the variance.
c. An agreement to waive claims for dim-
inution in value as set forth in Section 3.07 of
this code.
d. From the time of filing the application
until the time of such hearing, the application
and all maps, plans and other accompanying
data shall be available for public inspection
during office hours at the office of the secretary
of the board. (Ord. 07-134 § 1 (part))
34.02 Findings and Actions by the Board of 
Adjustment
A variance from the provisions of the code
shall not be authorized unless the board shall
find upon sufficient evidence:
a. That there are special circumstances or
conditions applying to the land, building, or use
referred to in the application which do not
apply to other properties in the district;
b. That such special circumstances were
not created by the owner or applicant;
c. That the authorizing of the variance is
necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of substantial property rights; and
d. That the authorizing of the application
will not be materially detrimental to persons
residing or working in the vicinity, to adjacent
property, to the neighborhood or the public
welfare in general.
The board shall prescribe in connection with
any variance such conditions as it may deem
necessary in order to fully carry out the provi-
sions and intent of this code. Such conditions
may include, among other things, a limitation
of the time for which such variance shall be
valid. Violation of any such condition shall be
a violation of this code and such violation shall
render the variance null and void.
34.03 Alternative Prevailing Standards
Where the property subject to a request for
variance relief has been developed and main-
tained in conformance with private deed
restrictions which materially differ from, but
are not substantially less restrictive than, ordi-
nance provisions affecting the requested relief,
the board may consider such difference as con-
stituting a special circumstance not created by
the owner or applicant. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part))
===PAGE 178===
35.01
93 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
SECTION 35
SIGNS
Subsections:
35.01 Purpose and Objectives
35.02 Definitions
35.03 General Requirements
35.04 Comprehensive  Sign Program
35.05 Sign Standards
35.06 Resort Sign Standards
35.07 Prohibited Signs
35.08 Temporary Signage
35.09 Flagpole Requirements
35.10 Nonconforming Signs
35.11 Violation; Enforcement
35.01 Purpose and Objectives
The purpose of this sec tion is to establish
regulations for signs within the city to enable
communication through signs consistent with
the need to regulate aesthetics and avoid clutter
and the protection of free speech, to protect
safety of the traveling public and to promote
economic development.
The objectives on which the provisions and
specifications regulating signs are founded are:
a. Preserving the city’s character, scenic
appeal and uncluttered appearance.
b. Adopting balanced regulations that rep-
resent a reasonable and defensible compromise
between prohibiting sign s altogether and pro-
liferation of signs of all sizes, shapes and col-
ors, particularly along major thoroughfares.
c. Encouraging the use of comprehensive
sign programs, where applicable, to provide
flexibility that will encourage creativity and
quality in signage design appropriate to the
character of Litchfield Park, as well as to pro-
vide adequate identification and information,
and to promote traffic safety. 
d. Remaining content-neutral and not plac-
ing unconstitutional lim itations based on the
viewpoint of the message contained. (Ord. 24-
286 § 1 (Exh. A))
35.02 Definitions
a. Terms Defined
A-Frame Sign A temporary sign supported
by its own frame in the shape of an “A” when
in use, or an upside down “T”; also referred to
as a “sandwich” or “tent” sign. “A-frame sign”
does not include signs not visible from streets
or public rights-of-way.
Abandoned Sign A sign that pertains to a
business, use, time or event which no longer
exists or when the purpose for which the permit
for the sign was approved has been fulfilled or
no longer exists.
Awning Sign  A structure often made of
plastic or canvas that serves as a shelter or pro-
jection over a storefront, window, door or deck.
Banner Any temporary sign of lightweight
fabric or similar material that is temporarily
mounted to a pole or a building by a frame at
one or more edges. “Banner” includes pennants
and streamers. “Banner” does not include any
flags.
Billboard Sign  A static or electronic sign
which is intended to advertise a business, com-
modity, service, entertainment, product, or
attraction sold, offered, or existing elsewhere
than on the property where the sign is located
or on a vehicle. “Billboard sign” does not
include city, church, civic organization special
event signs or temporary special event signs.
Building Front Footage  The maximum
dimension of the building front measured on a
straight line parallel to any fronting street.
Building-Mounted Sign A sign attached to,
painted on or erected against a wall of a build-
ing with the face of the sign in the plane of the
===PAGE 179===
35.02
94 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
wall or on a surface parallel to the face of the
wall.
Business Front Footage The lineal distance
of the building space occupied by the particular
business measured on a straight line parallel to
the face of the building in which the main
entrance into that particular business is located.
Drive-Through Reader panel sign for a
drive-through use.
Fascia A parapet-type wall (see definition
for parapet) used as part of the facade of a flat-
roofed building and projecting not more than
six feet from the building face immediately
adjacent thereto and enclosing at least three
sides of the projecting flat roof.
Freestanding Monument Sign  A sign
mounted or erected on its own self-supporting
structure that is det ached from any building,
fence or wall.
Ground Level The finished grade of exist-
ing sidewalks or where there is no sidewalk, six
inches above the street grade. In native terrain,
ground level is the mean level of the area
immediately around the sign.
Illegal Sign Any sign except the following:
1. A sign allowed by this section and not
requiring a permit;
2. A sign allowed by this section for which
a valid permit has been issued and is in force;
3. A sign whose permit renewal is delin-
quent for fourteen days or more.
Incidental Sign A sign only used in combi-
nation with an existing or proposed building-
mounted sign, freestanding monument sign, or
wall-mounted sign to provide additional on-
site guidance.
Indirect Lighting A source of external illu-
mination, either to backlight the sign, or
located a distance away from the sign, but
which is, itself, not visible from any normal
position of view.
Internal Lighting A source of illumination
entirely within the sign which makes the con-
tents of the sign visible at night by the light
being transmitted throug h a translucent mate-
rial but wherein the source of the illumination
is not visible.
Lighting The method of illuminating a sign
for visibility.
Maintenance The replacing or repairing of
a part of a sign without changing the wording,
location, composition, or color of said sign.
Neighborhood Sign  A temporary sign
which is intended to direct or inform individu-
als about specific activities or events taking
place in the vicinity.
Nonconforming Sign  A sign which does
not conform to the provisions of this code but
which, when first constructed, was legally
established.
Parapet Wall A wall extending above the
plate line of a building.
Plate Line The point at which any part of the
main roof structure first touches or bears upon
an external wall.
Real Estate Sign A sign located at the prop-
erty or premises advertising the sale, lease or
rental of the property or premises upon which
the sign is located.
Reader Panel Sign A nonelectronic on-site
sign which is designed  to permit immediate
manual change of copy.
Service Station Sign  A sign designed to
accommodate regularly changing information
pertaining to on-site offerings for fuel services
uses.
Shingle Sign A sign whose front is under an
extended roof (e.g., an overhang), a covered
walkway, a covered porch, or the like.
===PAGE 180===
35.02
95 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
Sign Area Sign area is the sum of the areas
of all permitted signs, except as otherwise per-
mitted. Sign area shall be measured as follows:
1. For sign copy mounted or painted on a
background panel or area distinctively painted,
textured or constructed, the sign area is the
area within the outside dimensions of the back-
ground panel or surface.
Example Sign Copy Area
2. For sign copy consisting of individual
letters and/or graphics affixed to a wall or por-
tion of a building that has not been painted,
textured, or otherwise altered to provide a dis-
tinctive background for the sign copy, the sign
area is the area within the smallest rectangle
that will enclose the sign copy. Sign area shall
not include any archit ectural enhancements,
decorative embellishments or support struc-
tures so long as said support structures, decora-
tive embellishments or architectural
enhancements are approp riately scaled to the
size of the copy as determined by the design
review board and shall not extend more than
two feet above the height of the measurable
sign area.
Example Sign Copy Area
3. Unless modified as part of a compre-
hensive sign program, for sign copy mounted
or painted on an intern ally illuminated sign or
internally illuminated element of a building,
the entire internally illuminated surface or
architectural element that contains sign copy
will be counted as sign area.
y 
! 
CHEESE 
BURGERS 
X 
X 
-~ , 
I 
I 
CITY 
NATIONAL 4 vf /f /f BANK 
/f ~ D; /f 
y 
===PAGE 181===
35.02
96 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
Example Illuminated Sign Copy Area
4. Unless modified as part of a compre-
hensive sign program, number of sign faces:
A. One: Area of the single face only.
B. Two: If the interior angle between the
two sign faces is forty-five degrees or less, the
sign area is the area of one face only; if the
angle between the sign faces exceeds forty-five
degrees, the sign area is the sum of the areas of
the two faces.
C. Three or more: For any sign containing
three or more faces, the sign area shall be mea-
sured as the sum of areas of all the sign faces.
Example Sign Copy Area
5. Unless modified as part of a compre-
hensive sign program, three-dimensional,
sculptural or other nonplanar signs: Sign area
will be the sum of the areas of the vertical faces
of the smallest polyhedron that will encompass
the sign structure.
6. Unless modified as part of a compre-
hensive sign program, signs having more than
one component (e.g., a service station sign
combination mounted on a common base), the
sign area is the area of the rectangle enclosing
all components of the sign.
Example Dimensional Sign Copy Area
Greater than 45° Upto 45° 
Two (2) Faces One (1) Faces 
===PAGE 182===
35.02
97 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
Example Fuel Price Sign Copy Area
Sign Copy
1. Any device for visual communication
that is used for the purpose of bringing the sub-
ject thereof to the attention of the public, but
not including any flag, badge, or insignia of
any local, state, or federal governmental
agency.
2. The term “sign” shall mean and include
any display of any letter, numeral, figure,
emblem, picture, outline, character, artwork,
announcement or means whereby the same are
made visible and for the purpose of attracting
attention to make anything known, whether
such display be made on, attached to, or as a
part of, a structure, surface or thing including,
but not limited to, the ground or any rock, tree,
or other natural object, which display is visible
beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel of
property on or over which the display appears.
Sign Height Sign height is defined as fol-
lows:
1. Freestanding Monument Sign
Sign height is the distance from the top of
the measurable sign area to the top of curb of
the public road nearest the sign, or to the crown
of public road nearest the sign if no curb exists.
Nonilluminated archit ectural embellishments
may extend an additiona l eighteen inches in
height from the highest point of sign copy.
Example Freestanding Maximum Sign Height
2. Wall- or Building-Mounted Signs
Sign height is the distance measured from a
point perpendicular to the top of the midpoint
of the sign structure to the top of the finished
floor of the ground floor level directly below
the midpoint of the sign.
Width 
~ r 
~ =1H 
GAS 
I T UP 
'-
9 eight 
I I 
~111~ 11 1111 ~II'~ 
D 
===PAGE 183===
35.03
98 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
Example Midpoint of Sign
Structural Member A support that is a con-
stituent part of any structure or building.
Temporary Sign A sign displayed that is
not permanently anchored  to the ground, to a
structure, or permanen tly affixed to a perma-
nent sign that relates to an infrequent or spo-
radic activity or use. Temporary signs include,
but are not limited to, open house signs, politi-
cal signs, development signs, and yard sale
signs.
Wall-Mounted Sign A sign attached to,
painted on or erected ag ainst a wall with the
face of the sign in the plane of the wall or on a
surface parallel to the face of the wall.
Window Sign A sign visible through and/or
affixed in any manner to a window or exterior
glass door that is intended to be viewable from
the exterior (beyond the sidewalk immediately
adjacent to the window), including signs
located inside a buildin g but visible primarily
from the outside of the building.
Window Sign, Neon An illuminated tubular
neon sign, not larger than four square feet in
area, visible through and/or affixed in any man-
ner to a window or exterior glass door that is
intended to be viewable from the exterior
(beyond the sidewalk immediately adjacent to
the window), including signs located inside a
building but visible primarily from the outside
of the building. (Ord. 24-286 § 1 (Exh. A))
35.03 General Requirements
a. Sign Permit
A sign permit approved by the city shall be
required prior to any sign, other than those spe-
cifically exempted herein, being erected,
exhibited, re-erected, altered in any material
way, or relocated in the city.
1. Illuminated Signs
Signs which are to be illuminated electri-
cally shall require a separate electrical permit
in conformity with the electrical code of the
city.
2. Permit Exceptions
A permit is not requir ed for the following
signs or sign alterations, but all such signs and
alterations shall be subject to the requirements
of this section:
A. Signs expressly excepted from the
requirement for a permit in this section.
B. Repainting without changing composi-
tion or colors or minor nonstructural repairs
except electrical repair.
C. Relocation of sign as required by city.
D. Window signs, nonilluminated, and
having an area of four square feet or less.
E. Identification as required by public
safety agencies.
F. Political signs pursuant to A.R.S. § 16-
1019.
Mid Point of Sign 
Mid Point of Sign 
SIGN 
t 
Height 
______ ........__ ________ J l ________ ......_______,._ 
......_ __ Finished Grade Beneath Center of Sign 
===PAGE 184===
35.03
99 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
3. Permit Application and Expiration
A. To obtain a permit,  the applicant shall
file an application on a form furnished by the
city. The application shall contain the location
by street and number of the proposed signs and
the name and address of the sign contractor.
All applications shall be accompanied by the
written consent of the owner, lessee, agent, or
trustee having charge of the property on which
the sign is posted.
B. Every permit issued under this section
shall expire and become null and void if the
work authorized by su ch permit is not com-
pleted within ninety days from the date of such
permit. Before such work can be recom-
menced, a new permit shall be obtained and the
fee for the new permit shall be one-half of the
fee required for a new permit for such work,
provided no changes have been or will be made
in the original plans and specifications for such
work.
4. Permit Fees
Application and fees:
A. All applications for a sign permit shall
be submitted with a f ee established by the
council.
B. The fee will be refund ed to the applicant
if the application for permit is denied.
5. Sign Permit
The zoning administrator or designee is
authorized to issue sign permits in accordance
with this section.
b. Code Limitations
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the
erection, construction and maintenance of offi-
cial governmental messaging, traffic, fire or
police signs, signals, devices and markings of
the state of Arizona and/or the city or other
public authorities or the posting of notices
required by law.
c. Conflicting Provisions
In the event a provision in this section con-
flicts with another provision or another code
then the more restrictive provision shall apply.
The city cannot regulate or evaluate content.
d. Procedures and Enforcement of Code
The zoning administrator is authorized to
enforce this section pursuant to the procedures
set forth in this section and applicable law.
e. Design and Construction
1. Building Code
In addition to the requirements of this sec-
tion, all signs shall conform to the require-
ments of the building codes of the city.
2. Permanent Sign Materials
All permanent signs sh all be constructed
using structural members of materials subject
to approval of the zoning administrator or des-
ignee. Nonstructural tr i m  m a y  b e  o f  w o o d ,
metal, approved plastics or any combination
thereof.
3. Materials for Temporary Signs
Materials proposed to be used in construct-
ing temporary signs shall be stated in the appli-
cation for the sign permit. Adequacy of the
material proposed from the standpoints of sta-
bility and safety and of composition and color
shall be subject to approval by the zoning
administrator or designee.
f. Lighting and Movement
1. All building-mounted signs in the pub-
lic facilities zoning district shall not include
any lighting.
2. All building-mounted signs in the
neighborhood commercial or agritourism zon-
ing district shall be co nstructed with reverse
pan channel letters and may be backlit with no
visible lighting source. The reverse pan chan-
nel letters shall be constructed of metal with no
translucent material on the outward face of the
letter.
===PAGE 185===
35.03
100 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
3. All building-mounted signs in the com-
munity commercial or city center zoning dis-
trict shall be constructed with either pan
channel letters or reverse pan channel letters.
Pan channel letters must feature a translucent
material on the outward face of the letter (not
clear or open) so that the internal lighting
source is not directly visible. Reverse pan
channel letters may be backlit with no visible
lighting source and constructed of metal with
no translucent material on the outward face of
the letter.
4. All freestanding monument signs shall
be internally illuminated with no visible light-
ing source unless otherwise approved by the
design review board through a comprehensive
sign program.
5. No single light source element which
exceeds fifteen watts (or its equivalent) shall
be used in connection with a sign or to illumi-
nate a sign in a way that exposes the face of the
bulb light or lamp when viewed from a public
street or adjacent residential use.
6. Illumination resultin g from all signs and
lighting on any one property in a nonresiden-
tial zone shall be shielded so that the light
source elements (light bulbs) are not directly
visible from property in a residential zone that
is adjacent to or across a street from the prop-
erty in the nonresidential zone.
7. No internally illuminated sign, other
than reverse pan channe l and backlit, shall be
allowed on property in  a residential zone.
Lighting from all light sources operated for the
purposes of sign illumination on property in a
residential zone shall be shielded from other
property in the residential zone.
8. Other signs less than four square feet
may be internally illuminated or externally
illuminated. Exterior illumination shall be top
mounted and shielded to aim downward only.
9. A sign or signs or any part thereof
which moves or may be moved by any means
shall be prohibited.
g. Location
1. Obstruction of Exits
No sign shall be installed so as to obstruct
any door, window or fire escape of any build-
ing or to interfere in any way with a person’s
moving freely through any one of them.
2. Traffic Hazards
No sign shall be erected in such a way as:
A. To interfere with or  to confuse traffic;
B. To create any traffic hazard; or
C. To obstruct the vision of motorists.
3. Construction over Public Property
No sign shall be erected in a manner which
projects over any public sidewalk, street, alley,
or public place withou t the city’s express
approval for a limited time.
h. Maximum Size, Height, and Number
of Signs, and Minimum Setbacks
The permissible areas, height, setbacks, and
number of signs depend upon the type, purpose
and location of the proposed sign(s) and such
criteria as are defined herein in those sections
and subsections pertaining to the particular
sign.
i. Inspections and Maintenance
1. Inspections
Unless waived by the zoning administrator,
all signs shall be subject to the following
inspections:
A. Footing inspection on all freestanding
signs;
B. Electrical inspectio n on all illuminated
signs;
C. Inspection of braces, anchors, supports
and connections on all signs;
D. Inspection to ensure that the sign has
been constructed acco rding to an approved
application and sign permit.
===PAGE 186===
35.03
101 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
2. Inspection Markings
All signs shall be marked with the permit
number. This marking shall be permanently
placed by the fabricator of the sign. The permit
number shall be assigned and recorded on the
permit at the time the permit is issued. The per-
mit number shall be shown on the face of the
sign, preferably in the lower right-hand corner,
and shall be in numbers between two and one-
half and four inches high.
3. Maintenance
Failure to maintain signage in compliance
with this section or an approved sign program
constitutes a violation of this section.
A. Any sign or component of a sign which
is in a damaged or deteriorated condition and
constitutes a danger or hazard to public safety
or a visual blight shall be promptly repaired or
replaced. Surface mate rials and components
shall be kept free of chipping, peeling, fading,
cracks, holes, buckles, warps, splinters, or rust-
ing visible from an adjacent property or street.
Illuminated signs shall be maintained in good
operating condition including prompt removal
and replacement of all defective bulbs, light
emitting diodes, fluor escent tubes, neon or
other inert gas light segments, damaged or
deteriorated electrical wiring, and malfunc-
tioning control devices and related circuitry.
B. All signs are subject to the following:
I. Footing inspection on all freestanding
signs;
II. Electrical inspection on all illuminated
signs;
III. Inspection of braces , anchors, supports
and connections on all signs;
IV. Inspection to ensure that the sign has
been constructed according to an approved
application and sign permit.
C. Abandoned Signs
Abandoned signs shall be removed. When a
sign is removed, the structure behind the sign
shall be restored to its original condition and
color. No additional sign permits will be issued
until this is completed.  Any on-site sign or
abandoned sign, including its supporting struc-
ture, which no longer identifies the current
occupancy of the premises upon which such
sign is located or othe rwise fails to serve its
original purpose, shall be deemed a public nui-
sance after a six-month lapse and shall be
removed by the owner of  the land or building
upon which such sign is located.
j. Sign Walkers
Sign walkers shall be  permitted, subject to
the following regulations:
1. Location
Sign walkers shall be located only:
A. At least thirty feet from a street intersec-
tion or driveway intersection measured from
the back of the curb or edge of pavement if no
curb exists.
B. At least five feet from the street mea-
sured from the back of curb or edge of pave-
ment if no curb exists.
C. Sign walkers shall yield right-of-way to
pedestrians, bicycles and all others traveling or
located on the sidewalks.
D. At grade level.
2. Prohibited Locations
Sign walkers shall not be located:
A. In raised or painted medians.
B. In parking aisles or stalls.
C. In driving lanes or driveways.
D. On fences, boulders, planters, other
signs, vehicles, utility facilities, or any struc-
ture.
E. Within a minimum distance of twenty
feet from any other sign walker.
F. In a manner that results in sign walkers
physically interacting with motorists, pedestri-
ans, or bicyclists.
===PAGE 187===
35.04
102 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
3. Display
Signs shall be:
A. Displayed only during the hours the
business is open to conduct business.
B. Held, worn or balanced at all times.
4. Elements Prohibited
The following shall be prohibited:
A. Any form of illumination, including
flashing, blinking, or rotating lights;
B. Animation on the sign itself;
C. Mirrors or other reflective materials;
D. Attachments, including, but not limited
to, balloons, ribbons, or speakers.
k. Requirement for Conformity
It shall be illegal for a sign to be placed or
maintained in the city, except as provided in
this code. (Ord. 24-286 § 1 (Exh. A))
35.04 Comprehensive  Sign Program
The comprehensive sign program affords
flexibility that will encourage creativity and
quality in signage design appropriate to the
character of Litchfield Park, as well as to pro-
vide adequate identification and information,
and to promote traffic safety. All new construc-
tion or developments (residential and nonresi-
dential) consisting of multiple buildings may
submit a comprehensive sign program.
a. Consistent Themes
For all commercial projects, a uniform stan-
dard in design and materials quality for signage
apply.
b. Flexibility
The comprehensive sign program may allow
greater flexibility in sign location, number,
area or proportion of sign types within the total
maximum aggregate allowed, as well as height,
illumination and any other standards contained
herein consistent with  applicable standards,
project scale, sign el ements, design enhance-
ments and visual improvements.
c. Prohibitions
The comprehensive sign program shall not
included prohibited signs or signs not listed
with the allowances set forth in this section.
d. Approval
All comprehensive sign program submittals
shall be reviewed and approved by the design
review board. Decisions of the design review
board are appealable to the city council. 
e. Evaluation Criteria
In reviewing a comprehensive sign program,
the design review board evaluation shall
include, but not be limited to, consideration of
the following criteria: visibility and readability
for sign function, location relative to traffic
movement and access points, size of develop-
ment, design compatibility with architectural
and/or natural features of the project, context of
the surrounding area and landscape enhance-
ments. The program shall propose, and the
design review board shall consider for
approval, proportionate substitutions or trade-
offs of signage and project enhancements.
f. Design Elements
The comprehensive sign program shall
require that certain design elements be consid-
ered and addressed. The consideration and
inclusion of other design elements is encour-
aged to enhance the quality of the signage pro-
gram and to conform to village planning
concepts of the city of Litchfield Park. Com-
prehensive sign program preparation should
include investigation of new lighting technolo-
gies and methods for incorporation, where
practicable, to reduce unwanted light emission
from signage.
1. The design elements that must be
described and illustrated include:
A. Type and style of lettering and number-
ing;
B. Size of lettering and numbering;
===PAGE 188===
35.05
103 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
C. Size of any logotype and/or graphic rep-
resentation, which shall be included in total
signage area calculations;
D. Color of sign elements, including color
of sign background;
E. Composition of sign elements;
F. Lighting: internal, external with manu-
facturer specifications pertaining to lumens;
G. Sign materials;
H. Construction details;
I. Placement of sign on building;
J. Location of monument sign(s) on the
site;
K. Relation of sign to other development
signage. (Ord. 24-286 § 1 (Exh. A))
35.05 Sign Standards
Sign regulations govern residential and non-
residential uses unless the signs are governed
by a comprehensive sign program pursuant to
Section 35.04.
Residential Use
Freestanding 
Monument Signs
Location Within a landscaped area of 2 sf per 1 sf of sign area.
Size/Area ≤ 40 sf.
Height 6' maximum.
Approval Final location approved by city zoning administrator or designee.
Wall-Mounted 
Signs
Design Individual letters on a freestanding wall.
Location 5' setback from property line.
Size/Area ≤ 40 sf.
Height 6' maximum.
Approval Final location approved by city zoning administrator or designee.
Nonresidential Use
Awning Signs
Size/Area 20% maximum of front awning face.
Height Maximum of first floor.
Lighting May be illuminated subject to Section 35.03(f).
Signage
Calculation
50% of awning sign area shall be included in aggregate sign calculations.
===PAGE 189===
35.05
104 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
Building-Mounted 
Signs
Size/Area 0.67 sf per 1 linear foot.
1.5 sf per 1 linear foot if more than 300' from right-of-way.
50% or less of the width of the building.
Maximum
Aggregate
120 sf per tenant.
240 sf for multi-tenant.
Height Minimum of 3' below the top of the sign and the top of the building.
Lighting May be illuminated subject to Section 35.03(f).
Drive-Through 
Signs
Number 2 per queuing lane.
Setback 45' from street side.
Visibility Front of the boards shall not be visible from any public street.
Size/Area 24 sf (does not count toward site’s total allowable aggregate signage).
Height 6' maximum.
Design Signs shall have a monument style base matching the architecture and 
construction materials of the building.
Landscaping 2 sf for each sf of sign area.
Lighting Internal and/or external illumination is allowed. Light sources must be 
shielded from view.
Freestanding 
Monument Signs
Number 1 per street side.
Size/Area 24 sf for single building/tenant.
24 sf for multi-tenant/building.
Separation Additional freestanding signs may be placed along street frontage with a 
comprehensive sign program. Minimum 300' between signs, max 24 sf in 
area and may be either a center ID sign or a multi-tenant ID sign.
Height 6' maximum.
Lighting May be illuminated subject to Section 35.03(f).
Exceptions Individual buildings/pads shall not be considered separate developments for 
signage purposes.
Signage
Calculations
Monument sign(s) for multi-tenant, multi-building or commercial center 
developments shall not count toward individual businesses/major tenants if 
not part of center ID.
Nonresidential Use (Continued)
===PAGE 190===
35.05
105 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
(Ord. 24-286 § 1 (Exh. A))
Incidental Signs
Size/Area 24 sf.
Height 4' maximum.
Lighting May be illuminated subject to Section 35.03(f).
Allowance Cannot be visible from right-of-way.
Reader Panel
Number 1 reader panel sign permitted.
Size/Area 24 sf.
Height 4' maximum.
Lighting External illumination is allowed. Light source must be shielded from direct 
view. No scrolling or flashing.
Signage
Calculation
Sign area will be included in the total aggregate signage calculation for 
freestanding monument signs.
Sign Design Change panel and marquee signs shall be allowed.
Service Station 
Signs
Number 1 per street frontage.
Size/Area 32 sf.
Height 6' maximum.
Lighting Internal and/or external illumination is allowed. Light sources must be 
shielded from view.
Sign Design Electronic change panel shall be allowed. Signs shall have a monument style 
base matching the architecture and construction materials of the building.
Shingle Signs
Number 1 shingle sign per business.
Height 8' clearance minimum.
Size/Area 4 sf maximum.
Placement Placed perpendicular to the building immediately adjacent to the business.
Window
Size/Area 25% of total window area through which sign will be visible.
Location Signs may be displayed within 3' behind the window.
Signage
Calculation
Sign area will be included in the total aggregate signage calculation for 
building-mounted signs.
Nonresidential Use (Continued)
===PAGE 191===
35.06
106 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
35.06 Resort Sign Standards
Sign regulations govern  resort districts and
resort uses in planned development (PD) dis-
tricts. Any new development shall be required
to submit a comprehensive sign program to be
reviewed and approved by the design review
board.
(Ord. 24-286 § 1 (Exh. A))
35.07 Prohibited Signs
a. Sign Types Not Permitted
1. Electronic reader panel, except as other-
wise permitted for service station or through a
comprehensive sign program.
2. Vehicle signs, except as consistently
used in the conduct of business. 
3. Electronic billboard truck, except as
used by government vehicles, including emer-
gency services and transit.
4. Roof-mounted.
5. Pylon or pole.
6. Portable signs, except as regulated in
Section 35.08, Temporary Signage. (Ord. 24-
286 § 1 (Exh. A))
Location and 
Size/Area
1. Resort identification signs may be located at each primary entrance to the resort 
from a major or minor arterial or collector street. The maximum height shall be 8' 
and the maximum sign area shall be 70 sf, aggregate per entry. Dual entrance 
monuments are permitted if total sign area does not exceed 70 sf.
2. Use identification monuments for businesses that are located within the resort 
shall be allowed smaller monument signs not to exceed 4' in height and 8 sf in area 
per sign face. These business identification monuments may be 4-sided or 3-
dimensional (3D).
3. Wall signs are permitted for individual uses within the resort not to exceed 60 
sf in area.
Lighting Signs shall be illuminated by backlit or indirect lighting.
General 
Requirements
1. No moving or animated signs shall be permitted. Changeable copy is permitted 
within the allowable sign area.
2. Traffic and directional signs within the site shall not exceed 8 sf in area, 
aggregate, and shall not exceed 5' in height.
3. Signs mounted on an exterior wall of any structure that are not identification 
signs shall contain only building identification (i.e., numbers or letters) as 
necessary for emergency access with a maximum area of 24 sf.
4. Signs placed at resort pedestrian gate entrances and exits shall be allowed and 
shall contain directions for entrance/exit, deliveries, and any restrictions and shall 
not exceed 4 sf in area maximum.
5. Resorts may also obtain temporary special event banners as defined within the 
temporary sign section below.
6. Total quantity and aggregate size of internal direction and identification signs 
shall be approved by the design review board as part of the comprehensive sign 
package.
===PAGE 192===
35.08
106-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
35.08 Temporary Signage
Temporary signs located in any zoning dis-
trict shall comply with the following regula-
tions:
a. Signs alerting motorists or pedestrians
to potential hazards such as road construction,
work in progress, open excavation, detours and
the like are required; flashing light signs
required during periods of low visibility.
b. Permits for temporary signs may be
issued or renewed by the zoning administrator
or designee for a period not to exceed one year
in all zones unless otherwise specified.
c. “No Trespassing” signs are permitted in
all districts without permit, may be freestand-
ing, and not to exceed four square feet not in
R-O-W or within one hundred feet of similar
sign on same parcel.
d. Rights-of-way (R-O-W or ROW) as
used in this section means those lands or ease-
ments, whether improved or unimproved, ded-
icated to or owned by the city, state or other
government entity for us e by the public for
public access or transportation.
e. Prohibited Temporary Signs
Same as prohibited permanent signs and
vehicle-mounted or transported (other than
bumper sticker or mounted on taxi, buses or
other public transportation); attached to utility
poles.
f. No temporary sign shall block a public
right-of-way or sidewalk, nor be placed in a
location to be a hazard or obstruct visibility.
g. A-frame signs shall be displayed only
during posted open hours located at grade on
the property of the business advertised and no
closer than twenty feet of any other A-frame
sign. Signs shall not be located within parking
aisles or stalls, driving lanes, trails, fences,
boulders, trees, planters, other signs, vehicles,
utility facilities, or any structure.
Sign Type Temporary signs are permitted subject to the following regulations:
Number Area Setbacks Height General 
Requirements
A-Frame 1 per business. 6 sf 
maximum.
4' clearance 
minimum for 
pedestrians on 
all walkways.
4' 
maximum.
No attachments 
(balloons, 
ribbons, 
speakers, etc.)
Banner 1 per business. 32 sf 
maximum.
Temporarily 
affixed to a wall, 
building, or 
mounting poles.
Minimum of 
3' below the 
top of the 
sign and the 
top of the 
building.
30 days 
maximum per 
temporary sign 
permit.
Temporary
Special Event
Zoning administrator or designee may approve signs for special events on a 
temporary basis. The zoning administrator or designee has the authority to 
approve design standards including number of signs, size, height and setback. The 
temporary special use signs may be approved for a time frame of 30 days and 
under special circumstances may be renewable once for an additional 30 days.
===PAGE 193===
35.09
106-2 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
(Ord. 24-286 § 1 (Exh. A))
35.09 Flagpole Requirements
a. Flagpoles shall not exceed the maxi-
mum building height al lowed in each zoning
district and shall be located and constructed
that if it should collaps e, its reclining length
would be contained on the property for which
it was installed.
b. The maximum size of any flags shall not
exceed fifteen square feet, with no single
dimension to exceed six feet.
c. A sign permit is required to display any
flag and must be included as part of the total
aggregate sign area.
d. Display of the United States flag must
meet all requirements of the United States Flag
Code, including nationa l and local lighting
standards.
e. Permits are required for sign poles. No
sign permits are required for flags unless oth-
erwise noted. (Ord. 24-286 § 1 (Exh. A))
35.10 Nonconforming Signs
Nonconforming signs are any signs which
do not conform to the pr ovisions of this code,
but which, when first constructed, were legally
allowed by the political  subdivision then hav-
ing control over signs.
a. Reasonable repairs and alterations may
be made to nonconforming signs. However, in
the event any such sign is damaged after Janu-
ary 1, 1989, the cost of repair of which exceeds
fifty percent of the cost to replace it, such cost
to be determined by a competent appraiser, or
in the event such sign is removed by any means,
including an act of God, such sign may be
restored, reconstructed, altered or repaired only
to conform with the prov isions of this code.
(Ord. 24-286 § 1 (Exh. A))
35.11 Violation; Enforcement
a. The procedures and penalties set forth in
Section 8, Violations, Enforcement and Penal-
ties, for violations of the zoning code, a zoning
Neighborhood 1 sign for each 
change of direc-
tion, plus 1 sign 
per mile of arte-
rial/collector road-
way, not to exceed 
5 signs total.
Sign area 
shall not 
exceed 4 sf 
per sign.
Signs shall be 
placed a 
minimum of 2 
feet from any 
curb.
2.5' 
maximum.
Signs shall be 
removed at the 
end of the day.
Real Estate
Signs
1 sign on premises 
of property 
advertised per 
listing agent, 
property owner, or 
management 
company.
Sign area 
shall not 
exceed 4 sf 
per sign.
Signs shall be 
placed a 
minimum of 2 
feet from any 
curb.
Sign Type Temporary signs are permitted subject to the following regulations:
Number Area Setbacks Height General 
Requirements
===PAGE 194===
35.11
106-3 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
ordinance, a use permit, a variance or a design
review approval shall apply to violations of this
section except as modified in this subsection.
b. Time Periods; Removal of Sign.
The time periods provided for correction of
the violation of this section shall be:
1. Permanent Signs
A ten-calendar-day written notice shall be
provided.
2. Temporary Signs
A two-calendar-day written notice shall be
provided.
3. Portable Signs
A two-calendar-day written notice shall be
provided, except for port able signs within the
right-of-way, which may be removed by the
code enforcement officer pursuant to subsec-
tion (b)(4)(B) of this section.
4. Signs in Right-of-Way
A. Political signs in the right-of-way that
are hazardous to public safety, obstruct clear
vision in the area or interfere with the require-
ments of the Americans with Disabilities Act
may be removed by the code enforcement offi-
cer without prior notice; provided, that the can-
didate or campaign committee that placed the
sign shall be notified within twenty-four hours
after removal. If the political sign is placed in
violation of A.R.S § 16-1019 and the place-
ment is not hazardous to public safety, does not
obstruct clear vision in  the area and does not
interfere with the requ irements of the Ameri-
cans with Disabilities Act, the code enforce-
ment officer shall notify the candidate or
campaign committee that placed the sign and,
if the sign remains in violation at least twenty-
four hours after such notification, the code
enforcement officer may remove the sign. The
code enforcement officer shall contact the can-
didate or campaign committee and shall retain
the sign for at least ten business days to allow
the candidate or campaign committee to
retrieve the sign without penalty.
B. Nonpolitical signs in the right-of-way
may be removed without notice. The owner of
the sign shall be notified of the removal if con-
tact information is available. The owner shall
pay city (I) the cost to the city of removing and
impounding the sign; (II) a recovery fee set by
the city; and (III) a daily storage charge set by
the city. Upon payment of such costs, the city
shall return the sign to the owner.
5. Signs without Permits
When a permit is required for a sign and no
permit was issued, the sign may be removed by
the code enforcement officer without notice.
The owner shall pay city (I) the cost to the city
of removing and impounding the sign; (II) a
recovery fee set by the city; and (III) a daily
storage charge set by the city. Upon payment
of such costs, the city shall return the sign to
the owner.
6. Safety Hazard
A sign that presents a safety hazard may be
removed by the code enforcement officer with-
out notice. The code enforcement officer shall
make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of
the sign that it will be removed immediately.
The owner shall pay city (I) the cost to the city
of removing and impounding the sign; (II) a
recovery fee set by the city; and (III) a daily
storage charge set by the city. Upon payment
of such costs, the city shall return the sign to
the owner.
c. Abatement of Nuisance
A violation of this section shall constitute a
public nuisance. In add ition to issuance of a
civil citation or criminal citation pursuant to
Section 8, the code enforcement officer is
authorized to abate the nuisance and charge the
cost to the property owner following the proce-
dures set forth in Article 9-5 of the city code if
===PAGE 195===
35.11
106-4 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
the owner of the sign fails to remove a sign after
any notice required by subsection (b)(4)(B) of
this section is given. (Ord. 24-286 § 1 (Exh. A))
===PAGE 196===
36.01
107
SECTION 36
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS 
FACILITIES
Subsections:
36.01 Purpose
36.02 Permitted Locations of WCFs
36.03 WCFs Permitted by Use Permit
36.04 Site and Construction 
Standards
36.05 Co-Location
36.06 Radio Frequency Standards; 
Interference; Noise
36.07 Applicant’s Submittal 
Requirements
36.08 Approval Process
36.09 Permit Term and Limitations
36.10 Renewal of Permit
36.11 Applicability
36.01 Purpose
The purpose of this sec tion is to establish
appropriate regulation of wireless communica-
tions facilities within the city. The regulations
are intended to encourage competition in the
telecommunications industry and remove reg-
ulatory barriers consis tent with the city’s
responsibility to protect the health, welfare and
safety of its residents. It is further the purpose
of this section to preserve the city’s residential
character and uncluttered appearance, ensure
compliance with federal radio frequency emis-
sions standards, provide for nondiscriminatory
treatment of substantially equivalent telecom-
munications providers and allow for the provi-
sion of telecommunications services within the
city. (Ord. 97-44 § 1 (part))
36.02 Permitted Locations of WCFs
Wireless communications facilities (WCFs)
are an allowed use upon obtaining a use permit
in compliance with this section, in the follow-
ing locations:
a. Resort (RT), Neighborhood Commer-
cial (NC), Community Commercial (CS),
Regional Commercial (RS), and General
Industrial (I) zoning districts;
b. Any zoning district, if the WCF is
located on property owned by a governmental
entity, including a school district or community
college district, so long as such property is used
for its governmental process, or owned by a
church and used for its worship or social pur-
poses. (Ord. 23-267 § 1; Ord. 97-44 § 1 (part))
36.03 WCFs Permitted by Use Permit
a. The city council may issue a use permit
subject to all the conditions of this section and
Section 33 of the Litchfield Park Zoning Code.
In granting a use permit, the city council may
impose conditions to the extent it concludes
such conditions are necessary to minimize any
adverse effect of the proposed WCF on adja-
cent properties.
b. The city council may allow placement
of a monopole in the city or waive or modify
requirements of this section only upon finding
that strict compliance with the provisions of
this section would result in noncompliance
with applicable federal or state law. The city
council may require such conditions as will, in
its judgment, secure su bstantially the objec-
tives of the standards or requirements waived
or modified. (Ord. 97-44 § 1 (part))
36.04 Site and Construction Standards
a. Support Structures
Support structures for WCFs shall be any of
the following:
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 25, 6-23)
===PAGE 197===
1. Building 
As used in this section, a building means an 
existing nonresidential building. 
2. An Existing Structure 
An existing structure including but not 
limited to, light poles, water towers, smoke­
stacks, and flag poles. This term does not 
include a lattice tower or buildings. 
3. An Alternative Tower Structure 
Clock towers, steeples, functioning security 
or recreational light poles and similar alterna­
tive-design support structures that camouflage 
or conceal the WCFs. 
b. Height Regulations 
1. Building-mounted WCFs shall not ex­
ceed a height of ten feet measured from the 
top of the WCF to the point of attachment to 
the building. 
2. WCFs mounted on an existing structure 
shall be limited to the height of the existing 
structure, unless adequately camouflaged. 
3. Alternative tower structures shall be 
limited to sixty-five feet in height above the 
original grade except a functioning security or 
recreational light pole shall have a height 
consistent with existing light poles or height 
usually allowed for such light poles. A greater 
height may be permitted by the city council 
upon further review. 
c. Setback Regulations 
For the purpose of determining whether a 
WCF complies with setback requirements, the 
dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even 
though the WCF may be located on leased 
parcels within such lot. Support structures 
must comply with all of the following: 
1. All WCF antennae, other than WCF 
antennae placed on existing structures in the 
public rights-of-way along major streets, shall 
be set back from all residentially zoned prop-
108 
36.04 
erty lines a minimum distance of seventy-five 
feet. 
2. For WCF antennae placed on existing 
structures in the public rights-of-way along 
major streets, defined for the purposes of this 
section, as any of the following streets: Bird 
Lane, Green Tree Drive, Litchfield Road, 
Litchfield Road Bypass, Villa Nueva, and 
Indian School Road/Wigwam Boulevard, no 
setback requirement applies. 
3. Any equipment cabinet or building used 
in conjunction with a WCF shall comply with 
the required setbacks for buildings of the 
zoning district in which it is located. 
d. Screening/ Aesthetics 
1. Building-mounted WCFs shall be 
screened from residential views and public 
rights-of-way in a manner architecturally com­
patible with the building. 
2. WCFs mounted on an existing structure 
shall be camouflaged from residential views 
and public rights-of-way in a manner architec­
turally compatible with the structure. 
3. The design, screening or camouflaging 
and site-specific location ofWCFs mounted on 
an alternative tower structure shall be subject 
to review and approval by the city council. 
4. WCFs including all components thereof 
shall be painted when this would serve the 
purposes of architectural compatibility or 
camouflage. The city shall approve the paint 
colors which must be nonreflective. 
5. Artificial lighting of a WCF, including 
its components, is prohibited, unless otherwise 
required by the Federal Aviation Administra­
tion. A motion-sensor light may be used, if the 
beam is directed downwards and shielded from 
adjacent properties. 
6. A maximum of one WCF antenna may 
be placed on any one street light pole in the 
public rights-of-way. Any antenna placed on 
===PAGE 198===
a street light pole shall be a maximum size of 
thirteen inches in length, seven inches in 
width, and five inches in height, except that a 
receiving wire with a maximum diameter of 
three-fourths inch and maximum length of 
twenty-four inches may be attached thereto. 
Any antenna placed on a street light pole in 
the public rights-of-way in a manner 
architecturally compatible with the structure. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to preempt 
additional screening or design requirements 
established by contractual agreement. 
e. Equipment Cabinets and Buildings 
1. Equipment cabinets shall be located 
within the building upon which antennae are 
placed if technically feasible. Otherwise, 
equipment cabinets shall be screened from 
view by a wall or landscaping, as approved by 
the city. Any wall shall be architecturally 
compatible with the building or immediate 
surrounding area. 
2. An equipment cabinet shall not exceed 
eight feet in height and a building shall not 
exceed one story. 
f. Security Fencing 
Security fencing, if any, shall not exceed 
six feet in height, except fencing shall be eight 
feet in height if screening a cabinet of such 
height. Fencing shall be effectively screened 
from view through the use of landscaping. No 
chain link fences shall be visible from public 
view. 
g. Anti-Climbing Features 
Anti-climbing features shall be incorporated 
into the WCF, as needed, to reduce potential 
for trespass and injury. 
h. Building Codes; Safety Standards 
All WCFs must be constructed and main­
tained in a structurally sound manner and 
comply with applicable local building codes 
and standards of the Electronic Industries 
109 
36.04 
Association. If, upon inspection, the city deter­
mines that a WCF fails to comply with said 
codes and standards, the city shall provide a 
notice to the owner, and the owner shall have 
thirty days to bring such facility into compli­
ance. If the owner fails to bring the facility 
into compliance, then the city may remove the 
facility and charge such costs to the owner or 
property owner where the facility is located. 
(Ord. 99-49 § I; Ord. 97-44 § 1 (part)) 
36.05 Co-Location 
a. Applicants shall cooperate and exercise 
good faith in co-locating WCFs on the same 
support structures or site. Good faith shall 
include sharing technical information to evalu­
ate the feasibility of co-location, and may 
include negotiations for erection of a replace­
ment support structure to accommodate co­
location. A competitive conflict to co-location 
or financial burden caused by sharing such 
information normally will not be considered as 
an excuse to the duty of good faith. 
b. In the event a dispute arises as to 
whether a perrnittee has exercised good faith 
in accommodating other users, the city may 
require the applicant to obtain a third party 
technical study at applicant's expense. The 
city may review any information submitted by 
applicant and permittee(s) in determining 
whether good faith has been exercised. 
c. No co-location may be required where 
the shared use would or does result in signifi­
cant interference in the broadcast or reception 
capabilities of the existing telecommunications 
facilities or failure of the existing WCFs to 
meet federal standards for emissions. 
d. Failure to comply with co-location 
requirements when feasible may result in 
===PAGE 199===
-------- --· -
denial of a permit request or revocation of an 
existing permit. (Ord. 97-44 § l (part)) 
36.06 Radio Frequency Standards; 
Interference; Noise 
a. The WCF shall comply with federal 
standards for radio frequency emissions. Fail­
ure to meet federal standards may result in 
termination or modification of the permit. 
b. The permittee shall ensure that the 
WCF will not cause interference with the 
reception of existing WCF devices, cable 
television, community antennae television 
systems, or satellite broadcast television sys­
tems. If at any time the city finds that the 
WCF interferes with such reception, and if 
such interference is not cured within thirty 
days, the city may revoke or modify the per­
mit. 
c. A WCF and any related equipment, 
including backup generators and air condition­
ing units, shall not generate continuous noise 
in excess of forty decibels (dBa) measured at 
the property line of any residential property, 
and shall not generate continuous noise in 
excess of fifty decibels ( dBa) during the hours 
of seven a.m. to ten p.m. and forty decibels 
(dBa) during the hours of ten p.m. to seven 
a.m. measured at the property line of any non­
residential property. (Ord. 97-44 § I (part)) 
36.07 Applicant's Submittal 
Requirements 
An applicant shall submit the following 
items to the planning and zoning department: 
a. Inventory: An inventory list and map of 
existing WCFs operated by the applicant and 
other providers within two miles of the pro­
posed site ("service area"). The inventory list 
must include specific information as to loca-
110 
36.05 
tion, height and design of each facility. The 
city may share such information with other 
applicants seeking to locate WCFs within the 
service area, in order to encourage co-location. 
b. Report on Alternatives: A report ex­
plaining why the WCF is needed a the re­
quested location. If applicant is seeking to 
construct a new monopole pursuant to Section 
36.03(b), applicant shall explain why co-loca­
tion or location on another kind of support 
structure is not feasible, including efforts made 
to develop such an alternative. If the city has 
requested that applicant co-locate its WCF on 
a site, applicant shall explain why collocation 
is not feasible, including efforts made to de­
velop such an alternative. If the city has re­
quested applicant to consider location of the 
WCF in possible alternative sites in adjacent 
cities, applicant shall include in its report 
efforts made to develop such alternatives, and 
a discussion of the feasibility of such alterna­
tives. Failure to make a report on alternatives 
and develop viable alternatives when so re­
quested may result in denial of a permit. 
c. Structural plans for the WCF: Plans 
should include a diagram of the proposed 
facility and antennae, including height, shape, 
size and nature of construction. The plans 
should include a diagram showing the 
separation between the proposed WCF and any 
existing WCF(s) on the same support structure 
or site, if co-location is planned. 
d. A site/landscaping plan showing the 
specific placement of the WCF on the site, 
including setbacks from adjacent property 
lines; showing the location of existing struc­
tures, trees, and other significant site features; 
and indicating type and locations of plant 
materials used to screen WCF components and 
the proposed color(s) for the WCF. 
===PAGE 200===
e. Photosimulations of the view of the 
proposed facility from residential properties 
and public rights-of-way at varying distances. 
f. A signed statement stating that: 
1. The applicant agrees to allow co-loca­
tion of additional WCF equipment by other 
providers on the applicant's support structure 
or within the same site location, when feasi­
ble; and 
2. If the applicant locates its WCF on 
leased property, the applicant agrees it will not 
request the landowner to exclude other provid­
ers from co-locating a WCF on such site when 
co-location may be feasible. 
g. Prior to beginning operations, the per­
mittee shall submit a verified report which 
provides a calculation of its installed peak 
radio frequency ("RF') emissions capacity at 
the site, the cumulative installed peak RF 
emissions capacity at the site (including a 
description of any co-location providers). and 
compares the results with established federal 
standards. 
h. Any other information required by the 
city for issuance of a use permit pursuant to 
Section 33 of the Litchfield Park Zoning 
Code. 
i. If applicant seeks a waiver or modifica­
tion of any requirement herein, the city will 
request applicant to submit additional informa­
tion to determine whether strict compliance 
with this section is feasible. 
j. Applicants shall pay a pennit fee as 
established by resolution of the council, which 
fee shall include all consulting costs as may be 
required by the city to review the application. 
(Ord. 97-44 § 1 (part)) 
36.08 Approval Process 
a. The city shall act on any application for 
111 
36.07 
authorization to place, construct or modify a 
WCF within a reasonable period of time after 
such application is duly filed with the city, 
taking into account the nature and scope of 
such request. 
b. The planning and zoning department 
shall be the first to review any application 
submitted, and shall forward any recommenda­
tion to approve or deny the application request 
and any other relevant information to the 
planning and zoning commission. 
c. Any final decision to approve or deny 
a request shall be in writing and set forth the 
reasons and substantial evidence for the deci­
sion. (Ord. 97-44 § 1 (part)) 
36.09 Permit Term and Limitations 
a. A use permit for a WCF shall expire 
fifteen years after the effective date of the 
permit approval. 
b. Any permitted facility must be con­
structed and placed into use within twelve 
months of the date of the city council's ap­
proval or the approval shall expire, pursuant 
to Section 33.05 of this code. 
c. Upon failure to comply with conditions 
of approval or discontinuance of the WCF use 
for over one year, the permit may be revoked 
pursuant to Section 33.04 of this code and 
permittee must remove the facility or the city 
may cause the facility to be removed at the 
expense of the permittee or property owner 
where the facility is located. 
d. Permittee shall maintain the WCF, 
including paint and landscaping, to standards 
imposed by the city at the time of granting the 
permit. If the permittee fails to maintain the 
facility, the city may undertake maintenance 
at the expense of the applicant or terminate the 
permit, at its sole option. 
===PAGE 201===
e. The applicant/permittee shall notify the 
city in writing of all changes in ownership of 
the facility within sixty days of the change. 
(Ord. 97-44 § 1 (part)) 
36.10 Renewal of Permit 
A permittee may apply for a renewal of its 
pennit within six months prior to expiration. 
(Ord. 97-44 § 1 (part)) 
36.11 Applicability 
The requirements of this section apply to all 
new WCFs and the expansion and/or alteration 
of any existing WCFs; provided that an in­
kind or smaller replacement transmission 
equipment will only require a written notifica­
tion to the city. (Ord. 97-44 § I (part)) 
36.09 
112 
===PAGE 202===
SECTION37 
SITE PLAN REVIEW 
Subsections: 
37.01 Site Plan Review 
37.02 
37.03 
37.04 
Application Requirements 
Review Criteria 
Site Plan Appeals 
37.01 Site Plan Review 
Site plan review is intended to ensure that 
proposed development plans for more com­
plex projects or projects on sites with city­
wide importance comply with the provisions 
of this section. Site plan review is conducted 
administratively by the zoning administrator 
or his designee unless referral to the design 
review board is specifically stipulated. Site 
plan review is required for projects in the 
overlay (HPOD) and commercial (NC, CS, 
RS) districts or on such other properties as 
required by city council as a condition of re­
zoning. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part)) 
37.02 Application Requirements 
Applications for site plan review, when 
required herein, shall be submitted to the zon­
ing administrator with exhibits consisting of: 
a. A graphic · depiction of intended im­
provements to the site, drawn to a suitable 
scale, showing at least the following: 
1. Dimensions of the site, subparcels, if 
any, and streets, sidewalks, pathways or 
easements within or adjacent to the site; 
2. Locations and dimensions of all princi­
pal and accessory structures; 
3. Parking, loading, circulation and ma­
neuvering areas consistent with appropriate 
code requirements; 
4. Landscaping, drainage, open space and 
pedestrian connections; 
112-1 
37.01 
5. Phasing lines indicating incremental 
development parcels, if applicable. 
b. Illustrative materials, including but not 
limited to the following, in the form of artist 
renderings, elevations, schematic drawings or 
photographs of projects similar to that which 
is intended, depicting: 
I . Architectural design treatments applica­
ble to all four elevations of principal structures 
and to portions of accessory buildings visible 
from public streets or adjacent properties; 
2. Landscape materials, including parking 
lot islands, where appropriate; 
3. Signage treatments and/or entry monu­
mentation; 
4. Street furniture, paving treatments, site 
lighting and related elements. (Ord. 04-91 § I 
(part)) 
37.03 Review Criteria 
The proposed site plan shall be approved, 
with appropriate modifications, upon find­
ings of consistency with city requirements 
pertaining to: 
a. Property development standards of the 
district in which the site is located; 
b. Applicable engineering design guide­
lines pertaining to ingress/egress, drainage, 
utility placement and related matters; 
c. Design review criteria for appearance, 
site and building massing, and compatibility 
with desired neighborhood character. (Ord. 
04-91 § 1 (part)) 
37.04 Site Plan Appeals 
Applicants for site plan review may appeal 
decisions of the zoning administrator, in 
whole or in part, by filing a request for de­
sign review board hearing, pursuant to Sec­
tion 3.04. (Ord. 04-91 § 1 (part)) 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 203===
SECTION38 
PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT 
PLANS 
Subsections: 
38.01 Protected Development Right 
Plans 
38.01 Protected Development Right Plans 
a. Applications 
1. Applications for protected development 
right plans shall be filed in accordance with 
A.R.S. §§ 9-1201 through 9-1205 and this 
section. Only plans submitted to the city that 
have been designated as "protected develop­
ment right plans" at the time of submittal shall 
be considered for processing as protected de­
velopment right plans. Applications for pro­
tected development right plans for phased de­
velopments shall comply with the application 
requirements for overlay districts. Applica­
tions for protected development right plans for 
nonphased developments shall comply with 
the application requirements for site plan ap­
proval set forth in Section 37 and for subdivi­
sion plat approval. 
2. Applications for a protected devel­
opment right plan shall describe all of the 
following: 
A. The proposed uses of the property; 
B. The boundaries of the property; 
C. Significant topographical and other 
natural features affecting development of the 
property; 
D. The location of all existing and pro­
posed utilities and a provision for other infra­
structure on the property, including water, 
sewers, road and pedestrian walkways. 
3. Applicants shall submit all other studies 
and reports required by this code, the subdivi­
sion code and other codes of the city, including 
112-2 
38.01 
traffic reports, drainage reports, master street 
plans, development phasing schedules and 
phased public infrastructure schedules. 
4. The council shall set by resolution a fee 
for review and processing of protected devel­
opment right plans. An application is not com­
plete unless accompanied by such fee. 
b. Developments Other than Phased 
Developments 
l. A protected development right plan for 
a nonphased development shall be submitted 
as a site plan or preliminary subdivision plat 
and shall conform to all city requirements for 
site plan or preliminary subdivision plat ap­
proval. Plans submitted as protected develop­
ment right plans shall be reviewed by the de­
sign review board, who shall submit its rec­
ommendation to the council for approval or 
disapproval. 
2. An application for a protected devel­
opment right plan for a nonphased develop­
ment shall: 
A. Designate the plan as a nonphased pro­
tected development rights plan at the time of 
submittal; 
B. Comply with subsection a of this section; 
C. Include the general location on the 
property of the proposed buildings, structures 
and other improvements; 
D. Include the number of dwelling units 
and the square footage and height of the pro­
posed buildings and other structures. 
3. The protected development right plan 
shall be the final site plan or final subdivision 
plat approved by the council. 
4. A protected development right plan for 
a nonphased development is valid for three 
years. In its sole discretion, the council may 
extend this time period for a maximum of 
two additional years if it determines such 
extension is warranted by all relevant cir­
cumstances, including the size and type of 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 204===
the development, the level of investment of 
the landowner, economic cycles and market 
conditions. 
c. Phased Developments 
1. A protected development right plan for 
a phased development shall be submitted as a 
planned area development and conform to all 
city requirements for planned area develop­
ment and site plan or preliminary subdivision 
plat approval. Plans submitted as protected 
development right plans shall be reviewed by 
the design review board, who shall submit its 
recommendation to the council for approval or 
disapproval. 
2. An application for a protected devel­
opment right plan for a phased development 
shall: 
A. Designate the plan as a phased pro­
tected development right plan at the time of 
submittal; 
B. Be submitted as a planned area devel­
opment; 
C. Comply with subsection a of this section; 
D. Include the proposed phasing plan, the 
boundaries of each phase, and the schedule of 
development of each phase; 
E. Include the general location on the 
property of the proposed buildings, structures 
and other improvements for the first phase; 
F. Include the number of dwelling units 
proposed for all phases of the development; 
G. Include the square footage and height 
of the proposed buildings and other structures 
for the first phase. 
3. The protected development right plan 
shall be the final site plan or final subdivision 
plat approved by the council for that phase. 
Approval of a protected development right 
plan for one phase of a development is not 
approval of a protected development right 
plan for any other phase. No subsequent phase 
after the first phase shall be developed until 
112-3 
38.01 
the information required by subsections a and 
(c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section has been sub­
mitted and the final site plan or final subdivi­
sion plat has been approved by the council for 
that phase. 
4. A protected development right plan for 
a phased development is valid for five years. 
In its sole discretion, the city council may ex­
tend this time period for a maximum of two 
additional years if it determines such exten­
sion is warranted by all relevant circum­
stances, including the size, type and phasing 
of the development, the level of investment of 
the landowner, economic cycles and market 
conditions. 
d. A protected development right plan 
approved with a condition or stipulation that a 
variance be obtained does not confer a pro­
tected development right until the variance is 
obtained. Approval of a protected develop­
ment right plan does not guarantee approval of 
a variance. 
e. Except as provided in subsections f, g 
and h of this section, a protected development 
right is the right to undertake and complete 
the development and use of property under the 
terms and conditions of a protected develop­
ment right plan without compliance with sub­
sequent changes in zoning regulations and 
development standards, and precludes the en­
forcement against the development of any leg­
islative or administrative land use regulation 
of the city or an initiated measure that would 
change, alter, impair, prevent, diminish, delay 
or otherwise impact the development or use of 
the property as set forth in the approved pro­
tected development right plan. Upon approval 
of a protected development right plan, the 
owner has a protected development right to 
undertake and complete the development only 
to the extent of the specific elements and de­
tails shown on the plan without compliance 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 205===
with subsequent changes in zoning regulations 
and development standards. 
f. A protected development right does not 
preclude enforcement of land use regulations 
that would change, alter, impair, prevent di­
minish, delay or impact the development or 
use of the property as approved in the pro­
tected development right plan under any of the 
following circumstances: 
1. Changes agreed to in writing by the 
owner; 
2. Declaration by the council by ordi­
nance or resolution after notice and a public 
hearing, that natural or man-made hazards on 
or in the immediate vicinity of the property, if 
uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the 
public health, safety and welfare if the project 
were to proceed as approved in the protected 
development right plan. 
3. Declaration by the council by ordi­
nance or resolution after notice and a hearing 
that the owner or his representative intention­
ally supplied inaccurate information or made 
material misrepresentations that made a dif­
ference in the approval of the protected devel­
opment right plan by the city. 
4. The enactment of a state or federal law 
or regulation that precludes development as 
approved in the protected development right 
plan, in which case the council, after notice 
and a hearing, may modify the affected provi­
sions, on a finding that the change in state or 
federal law has a fundamental effect on the 
protected development right plan. 
g. A protected development right does not 
preclude the enforcement of a subsequently 
adopted: 
I . Overlay zoning classification that im­
poses additional requirements and that does 
not affect the allowable type or density ofuse, 
or ordinances or regulations that are general in 
nature and that are applicable to all property, 
112-4 
38.01 
so long as the overlay zoning classification 
does not affect the allowable type or density 
of use. 
2. Development fees applicable to similar 
properties in the city adopted pursuant to 
A.R.S. § 9-463.05. 
3. Building, fire, plumbing, electrical or 
mechanical code or other ordinance or regu­
lation general in nature and applicable to all 
property subject to land use regulation by 
the city. 
h. A protected development right does not 
preclude, change or impair the authority of the 
city to adopt and enforce zoning ordinance 
provisions governing nonconforming uses or 
structures on the property. 
i. After the approval of a protected de­
velopment right plan, the director of planning 
shall monitor the progress of the development 
to ensure compliance with the terms and con­
ditions of the original approval. If the devel­
opment is not progressing in compliance with 
the original approval, the director of planning 
shall submit a report and recommendation to 
the council, who may revoke its approval of 
the protected development right plan for fail­
ure to comply with applicable terms and con­
ditions imposed on the approval. 
j. The council may designate by ordi­
nance or resolution a development plan that is 
not identified as a protected development right 
plan at the time it is submitted a protected de­
velopment right plan upon a finding that 
granting a protected development right to un­
dertake and complete the development shown 
on the plan will promote reasonable certainty, 
stability and fairness in the land use planning 
and regulatory process and secure the reason­
able investment-backed expectations of the 
owner. (Ord. 04-91 § I (part)) 
(Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. I, 6-05) 
===PAGE 206===
39.01
112-5 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
SECTION 39
DESIGN REVIEW GUIDELINES
Subsections:
39.01 Architectural Design for Single-
Family Residential Uses
39.02 Architectural Design for 
Multifamily Residential Uses
39.03 Architectural Design for 
Commercial and Industrial 
Uses
39.03-01 Architectural Design Generally
39.03-02 Architectural Character and 
Style
39.03-03 Proportion and Scale
39.03-04 Building Massing
39.03-05 Building Materials and 
Textures
39.03-06 Color
39.03-07 Architectural Details
39.03-08 Climate and Energy 
Conservation
39.04 Site Design for Commercial and 
Industrial Uses
39.04-01 Site Design Generally
39.04-02 Spaces
39.04-03 Viewsheds
39.04-04 Building Placement and 
Orientation
39.04-05 Climatic Considerations
39.04-06 Linkage and Circulation
39.04-07 Parking Lots
39.04-08 Service Areas, Mechanical 
Equipment, Refuse Enclosures, 
etc.
39.04-09 Fences and Walls and Other 
Screening Devices
39.04-10 Drive-Through Facilities
39.01 Architectural Design for Single-
Family Residential Uses
Residential architectural design is intended
to achieve a harmonious design relationship in
the design and character of homes within a
neighborhood and the community that use the
materials and forms that complement the
southwest environment and which acknowl-
edge a harmonious relationship of structures to
their neighbors and to the community but not
necessarily a duplication of any specific style.
a. Design Criteria
Common issues that define the character and
theme of a neighborhood are:
1. Design elements and detailing shall be
continued completely around the structure
with the same importance put on all sides.
Such design elements shall include:
A. Articulation of wall planes, a variety of
roof forms, variation in roof heights, and ridge-
lines, or other architectural treatments.
B. Accent treatments and finishing details
such as pop-outs, reveals, and recesses are
required around all windows and doors, gable
ends and wall expanses on all elevations. Win-
dow frames and mullions must be factory fin-
ished.
C. Garage doors are to be made from sec-
tional metal or high-quality wood or equiva-
lent. Window panels are encouraged to be
integrated into the design of the garage door.
D. Pillars, columns, and posts are to be
sized to be proportional to the size of the home. 
E. Where possible, the garage should have
a side entry or be set back from the front of the
home. If neither is poss ible, the garage design
should not be more prominent than the entry or
main section of the house. 
2. Linear repetitive streetscape appearance
and building facades shall be avoided by pro-
viding variations between the front elevations.
===PAGE 207===
39.01
112-6 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
3. A variety of roof forms and ridgelines
shall be provided.
4. All building materials shall be durable
and appropriate for their intended use.
5. Colors shall relate well to the house and
area and be appropriate for the proposed style
of architecture. Colors that are included in the
city’s color palette are encouraged. Alternative
colors will require specific approval by the
city’s design review board.
6. Metal flashing, vents, pipes, electrical
panels and other exposed metal shall be
painted to match the color of the roof or house.
7. All ground mounted mechanical equip-
ment shall be completely screened from public
view. 
8. All fireplace chimneys shall be boxed to
avoid exposed metal flues.
9. Porches, balconies, and/or seating areas
on the front of the home  are encouraged to be
incorporated into the design of the dwelling
unit to provide covered area to protect resi-
dents from weather, enhance the elevation,
provide more depth to the dwelling unit and
create a sense of arrival.
10. All front entryways shall be lighted and
open. Side entries and doorways are allowed if
the door is visible from the street and not
behind the garage or living area. Narrow front
entries shall be designed in a manner so as to
avoid potential safety hazards and crime pre-
vention through environmental design
(CPTED) issues.
11. A minimum of one window on the first
floor shall be visible from the street.
12. If patio covers are provided as a stan-
dard feature, they shall match the architecture
of the house and the roof material.
13. Integrated patio covers are encouraged.
Columns must be proportional and appropriate
to the house. If a flat roof is provided, it must
be screened with a parapet or similar treatment.
14. Clay or concrete tile is encouraged as a
roof material.
15. The front of the house should be illumi-
nated for safety.
16. Garages should not be the dominant
feature on the lot but shall be located a mini-
mum of five feet back from the entry feature or
living area in medium and large lot develop-
ments. In small lot de velopments the garage
should be located in excess of the five-foot set-
back requirement.
17. If side entry garages are incorporated
into a development with the driveway internal
at the front of the house or external on the side
of the lot, the front facing wall must be archi-
tecturally integrated with the design of the
home.
18. Courtyard walls, a maximum three feet
in height in the front yard or side yards, or a
maximum of six feet within the allowable
building envelope and adjacent to the drive-
ways to create gathering areas, are encouraged.
19. Provide decorative pilasters, molding,
cornices, brick, stone, masonry or other facade
and accent materials to encourage curb appeal.
20. Add brick, river rock, natural stone, or
masonry to elevations in each neighborhood to
add a distinctive finishing touch to the home in
a single builder neighborhood.
21. Roof mounted mechanical equipment is
prohibited.
22. Each home shall have a location for the
storage of trash receptacles which is fully
screened from public view.
23. The location of th e house on the lot,
windows, orientation, building height and
location of on-site open space shall consider
preservation of the privacy of adjacent devel-
opment.
24. Custom homes when developed on
large lots or within an existing neighborhood
without an HOA must take into consideration
===PAGE 208===
39.02
112-7 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
the design of the existing homes on the adja-
cent lots, in an effort to provide compatibility
within the neighborhood. All homes are sub-
ject to review and approval of the design
review board. (Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.02 Architectural Design for Multifamily 
Residential Uses
Residential architectural design is intended
to achieve a harmonious design relationship in
the design and character of homes within a
neighborhood and the community that use the
materials and forms that complement the
southwest environment and which acknowl-
edge a harmonious relationship of structures to
their neighbors and to the community but not
necessarily a duplication of any specific style.
a. Building Architecture
The design of the buildings in multiple resi-
dence developments must not only be appropri-
ate to regional architecture and climate, but
provide a high-quality living environment for
residents that combines privacy and conve-
nience with a sense of neighborhood. While
personal preferences in style and design will
always exist, there are underlying fundamen-
tals of good architectural design that must be
followed.
b. Building Elevations
1. Repetitive use of a single building con-
figuration and repetition in building facades
shall be avoided. There should be a rhythm to
building elevations which adds unity and inter-
est without becoming monotonous.
2. The proportions and details of building
components and material s shall reflect a resi-
dential character, par ticularly on the ground
floor level. Use building features of a human
scale, sized for their function.
3. The scale of a building should be
reduced by visually dividing it and giving
character to the individual units within. This is
accomplished by doing so me or all of the fol-
lowing:
A. Vary building heights.
B. Use offsets in wall planes on all eleva-
tions to create strong  shaded shadow lines
which define edges and enhance architectural
proportions, adding visual interest to otherwise
flat planes.
C. Large spans of uninterrupted roof
planes are discouraged. Roof features, such as
parapets, hips, and gables, are encouraged, fea-
turing patios, balconies, and a strong fenestra-
tion in the building elevations.
D. Use architectural details on cornices,
handrails, or parapet edges.
4. Individual unit entries shall not open
directly onto public sp aces, parking lots, col-
lector walkways, or streets. Recessing door-
ways into the building achieves unit
individuality. Arches, gateways, entry courts,
and roof forms should be used to shelter door-
ways and foster a sense of arrival. Entries
should be covered and private, yet visible for
safety.
5. Treatment of stairways is important to
the appearance of multis tory buildings. Stairs
shall be designed accor ding to the following
techniques:
A. Freestanding stairway s shall not make a
straight run from upper floors to the ground.
Landing(s) are required and shall be con-
structed with right-an gle turn(s). Stairways
shall be incorporated into, and compatible
with, the overall development. Stairs that are
well recessed into build ings and are largely
hidden from view may be left open, if doing
creates a more open and airy entry courtyard
area.
B. Stairways shall be built into courtyards
and entry areas and not simply hung off the
sides of buildings.
===PAGE 209===
39.02
112-8 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
C. Detail stairways by using insets,
reveals, decorative tile or stucco texturing,
decorative handrails, newel posts, etc.
6. All balconies and patios should be cov-
ered to shade them and protect them from
weather. All patios shall be enclosed by screen
walls to separate them  from the public spaces
adjacent to them and patios of units next door.
Balconies shall be separated from adjacent bal-
conies by walls of the same design and con-
struction as the building. Solid walls or open
structures may enclose the open sides of balco-
nies, but materials shall be compatible with the
buildings.
7. Patio covers shall be integrated into
buildings. Flat patio roofs shall be screened
with a parapet wall. Supports must be masonry
or stuccoed and painted wood structures. No
exposed wood posts or metal pipes.
8. Windows shall be placed to provide
light into the living spaces from as many direc-
tions as possible.
9. Use clerestory windows, glass block, or
other similar methods when providing privacy.
10. Recess building walls and windows.
Pop-outs, projections, shadow boxes, planter
boxes, sills, awnings (u sing materials that can
withstand sun exposure), or shutters shall
accent windows. Window frames and mullions
shall be finished with baked enamel paint or
anodized. Features such as accent trim, divided
windows, and rectangular or round openings
are encouraged.
11. Blank walls shall be avoided. All walls
should be given shadow and depth by articula-
tion, using projections and recesses, and using
features such as planters and fountains to break
up the expanse of blank walls. In no case
should the length of bl ank walls exceed fifty
feet.
12. All mechanical equipment, regardless
of location, shall be screened from view, using
the following techniques:
A. Rooftop equipment shall be hidden
behind parapets or other structures designed
into the building.
B. Ground-mounted equipment such as
exterior transformers, utility pads, satellite
earth station, cable TV, and telephone boxes
shall be installed out of view or screened with
a combination of walls and landscape.
C. Mechanical control equipment and
meters shall be intern al or ground-mounted
and screened with walls, enclosures, or land-
scaping.
13. Parking covers and detached garages
shall be designed to be compatible with other
project buildings and shall satisfy the follow-
ing requirements:
A. Parking covers and garages shall be
constructed of durable materials (no exposed
wood or plastics), and be the minimum height
necessary to perform their function.
B. Parking covers sh all be constructed
with fascias, parapets, recessed lights, and
other details that give a finished look. Garages
should repeat details of  the main buildings in
their design, and treat all sides of the buildings
which are visible.
C. Parking covers compatible for solar
installations are encouraged.
D. Parking covers and garages should
match the main building color.
E. All garages shall have operable doors.
14. Where separate structures are necessary
for accessory uses, they shall be of materials,
design, and colors comp atible with the main
buildings.
c. Materials and Colors
1. Building materials and color selection
should be simple and consistent throughout the
development. The project should blend and
===PAGE 210===
39.03
112-9 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
complement the surrounding area. Contrasting
materials and colors as accents are encouraged;
however, the basic palette should be simple
and relatively unobtrusive. Materials shall be
durable and appropriate for the climate.
Stucco, stone, and masonry shall be primary
building materials, with clay or concrete tiles
(or equivalents) used as roof materials.
2. Chimneys shall be constructed of the
same materials and textures used in the build-
ing. Exposed flues are prohibited. (Ord. 13-
191 § 1 (part))
39.03 Architectural Design for Commercial 
and Industrial Uses
(Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.03-01 Architectural Design Generally
Architectural design is intended to achieve a
compatible relationship in the design and char-
acter of buildings and other built elements in
the community but not necessarily a replication
of any specific historic or contemporary style.
(Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.03-02 Architectural Character and Style
a. The intent of this section is to establish
guidelines to ensure that development demon-
strates a quality of architecture within the city
that is responsive to and builds upon the aes-
thetic identity of the heritage of the community
rather than supporting or encouraging design
based on corporate identification or market
prototypes. The following are not acceptable:
1. Literal transplant of architectural styles
not indigenous or compatible to this area.
2. Corporate signature buildings or struc-
tures.
3. Buildings that derive their image pri-
marily from applied trea tments that express
corporate identity.
4. Buildings that are designed or stylized
to reflect a corporate or franchise prototype
image.
b. Buildings that occupy a pad or portion
of a building within a project or shopping cen-
ter shall share a similar design characteristic
and design.
c. Four-sided architecture is required.
Design elements shall be incorporated into
each of the four sides of the building and all
sides of a building must be compatible with the
front elevation. (Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.03-03 Proportion and Scale
Elevation and perspective drawings, photo-
graphic simulations, models and the use of
other graphic means are encouraged and may
be required to illustrate or fully explain how a
development will look and be compatible with
the surrounding community.
a. Proportion
Architecture of commercial and industrial
projects, including in dividual freestanding
structures, shall be designed so that they are in
proportion to elements within the project site,
adjacent properties and within the area they are
to be located.
1. Building proportions with horizontal
emphasis are generally preferred and desired.
Vertical design that exaggerates the building
height shall be avoided.
2. Vertical elements that are taller than the
majority of a building, such as towers, or nar-
row vertical masses can add visual interest and
identity to a building. Care must be taken to not
allow the vertical elements to overpower the
building design. Taller buildings or portions of
a building should be located internal to a site or
structure so that buildings step down in height
as they reach the edges of the site or structure.
===PAGE 211===
39.03-04
112-10 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
3. Variations in building height, roofline,
and grade definition; designing buildings in
proportion with the mass and floor area of
existing development; and using harmonious
materials, colors and complementary land-
scaping may all be used to mitigate the per-
ceived height of a building.
4. Varied spacing of elements in a facade
is desirable over repetitive features. “Store-
front” glass walls in excess of twenty feet in
length are not desirable.
b. Scale
1. New development should mimic the
predominant scale of any existing develop-
ment and use elements of similar scale.
2. Building elements and facades should
be kept intimate and close to human size so as
to achieve a sense of human scale and interest
that relates to pedest rian movement through
the project.
3. A mixture of scales may be appropriate
in less pedestrian areas.
(Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.03-04 Building Massing
All developments sha ll incorporate means
of reducing the visual size and bulk of build-
ings in order to maximize integration of the
built environment with the natural environ-
ment.
a. Buildings should be designed in a man-
ner that reduces apparent bulk by dividing the
building into smaller masses with each mass
relating to the internal function of the building.
b. Large or long continuous wall surfaces
shall be avoided. Buil ding surfaces should be
relieved with a change of wall plane that pro-
vides strong shadow and visual interest. Facade
undulation should be sufficient to create strong
shadow lines.
c. Variation in the roof silhouette can pro-
vide design interest and contribute to the archi-
tectural and landscape character of the city. 
d. The design of the building’s base should
demonstrate a strong connection with the
ground by using:
1. Low planters and walls.
2. Base plantings with  shrubs and trees.
3. Architectural veneers, wainscoting and
other treatments, including varying colors,
materials and textures.
e. Integrated covered walkways, trellises,
and awnings that provide deep shadow are
encouraged.
f. Upper or second levels of a building
should be reduced in floor area and building
mass to create roof terraces and outdoor spaces.
g. Pronounced eaves and distinct parapet
designs and cornice treatments can be used to
create a well-defined building top or roof line.
h. Clearly defined recesses and projections
are encouraged to break up horizontal surfaces
U!)deerable 
===PAGE 212===
39.03-05
112-11 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
and to provide visual interest and definition
using strong shadow and shade.
i. Entryway recesses, architectural projec-
tions, wall plane offsets and stepped building
forms are all desirable to break up a building’s
mass.
j. A facade not related to the rest of a
building mass is strongly discouraged. A con-
sistent level of detailing, patterning and finish
on all sides of a building is encouraged.
k. Facade details on all elevations of a
structure are encouraged.
l. All accessory structures should comple-
ment the architectural character of the primary
building through the use of similar or comple-
mentary materials, colors and textures.
(Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.03-05 Building Materials and Textures
The use of native materials is desirable to
create a “sense of place.” Manmade materials
simulating natural materials are discouraged. 
a. Every proposal shall demonstrate that
the use of natural materials from the area has
been studied.
b. In the southwest, natural textures are
bolder and stronger than in many other areas of
the country. Coarse and highly textured mate-
rials that create shadow patterns are desired.
c. River rock and sandstone, if used,
should be applied so that it looks as natural as
possible. It should be stacked or layered in a
manner that gives a sense of mass and connec-
tivity to the ground plane.
d. Concrete masonry block products that
are integrally colored and have textured faces
are desirable. 
pJ/A 
- · - .... - - - ~ ,.. -- •• 'I'!,,_ 
•~r--·"'l-:$. _ 1 # 1•l 
L
i •, . t ' 
'~ 
t 
·-. 
~- -----.... ---.. .. .. .. 
···---- --. --••• ·----... __ ··----... 
·~ ;,/""· '\ "\ 
,J ;!.\ I l~l~. ✓ -~' ... •. ! 
-- r: 
-~~ 71-- _ __,, __ 
. . . 
........ ,. _~ ---.... ... __ 
===PAGE 213===
39.03-06
112-12 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
e. Wood elements and wood siding may be
used in moderation and should be treated in a
manner as to preserve it from the hot, dry cli-
mate.
f. Exposed aggregate concrete may be
used for walkways or floors. Exposed, tradi-
tionally finished concrete may only be used in
moderation and only when it can be demon-
strated that it is complementary to overall
design scheme.
g. Windows and large areas of glass should
be deeply recessed. Nonreflectivity is desirable
over deeply tinted and/or other highly reflec-
tive treatments.
h. Encouraged pedestrian-oriented surface
materials include:
1. Exposed aggregate colored concrete.
2. Stamped and/or colored and textured
concrete.
3. Interlocking pavers.
4. Earth-tone concrete.
i. Discouraged external finishes visible to
the public include:
1. Cedar or other wood shakes.
2. Reflective, shiny or  mirror-like materi-
als.
3. Exposed, unfinished foundation walls.
4. Exposed plywood or particleboard.
5. Glass curtain walls.
6. White, black, or reflective roofs.
7. Unplastered/exposed standard CMU.
8. White exterior surfaces on skylights.
9. Shiny/reflective acrylic, metallic or
similar finishes, unless  limited to trim and
hardware.
(Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.03-06 Color
a. Color should be used to blend develop-
ment into its surrounding natural environment.
b. Accent colors may be used for architec-
tural trim not to exceed ten percent of any sin-
gle wall surface.
c. Color should be used to reduce and
articulate the apparent scale of building
masses. 
d. A palette of compatible hues has been
developed by the city to reduce visual impacts
and should be consulted when choosing the
color palette for buildings.
e. Stains and flat paints are desirable.
f. High gloss and factory finished metal
products and other products that are conducive
to high reflectivity are unacceptable.
g. Matte finishes are encouraged.
h. Light reflective colors and hues may be
used for accent and trim.
i. Bright and glossy or fluorescent colors
are strongly discouraged.
j. Corporate signature colors are strongly
discouraged, unless compatible with the over-
all color scheme and design of the entire proj-
ect. (Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))

===PAGE 214===
39.03-07
112-13 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
39.03-07 Architectural Details
Surfaces, details, ornament and other ele-
ments that enrich and accent architectural char-
acter of development are encouraged.
a. Desirable details include:
1. Stonework, keystones, wall caps, plant-
ers, fountains, monument sign bases, etc.
2. Covered walkways and balconies.
3. Cornices, moldings, accent lighting and
artwork.
4. Benches, earthen pots, etc.
5. Exposed beams and columns.
6. Exterior stairways and ramps that are
integral to the primary structure.
7. Columns, low screen walls, raised land-
scape planters, etc., are desirable elements to
be placed in front of primary entrances with an
entry framing in excess of six feet in width.
b. Undesirable details include:
1. Colored plastic and fiberglass.
2. Shiny/reflective metal.
3. False fronts.
4. Corporate signatur e design and color
schemes.
5. Poorly proportioned pueblo “steps” in
parapets. (Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.03-08 Climate and Energy Conservation
Well thought-out configuration may reduce
energy consumption and provide comfortable
indoor and outdoor spaces, and shall include
the following elements:
a. Shaded exterior walls through the use of
canopies, trellises, complementary awnings,
etc.
b. Roof overhangs for shade and weather
protection.
c. Protected outdoor spaces and landscap-
ing that create micro-climate conditions.
d. Horizontal offsets in an elongated build-
ing elevation. (Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.04 Site Design for Commercial and 
Industrial Uses
(Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.04-01 Site Design Generally
Site design addresses topography, vegeta-
tion and landscape features, and drainage char-
acteristics of the site. Not all of the criteria set
forth in this chapter will be applicable to all
sites; however, site design approval will be
reviewed and approved based on substantial
compliance with the following criteria and
other criteria set forth in this chapter:
a. Consistency of site grading and finished
floor elevations with the natural characteristics
of the site’s underlying topography. 
b. Integration into the natural environment
such as drainage ways, vegetation masses and
mature trees.
c. Building design and location that takes
advantage of the natural topography of the site
and compatibility with the apparent mass and
bulk of large structures with their settings.
d. Minimization of disturbance of land for
roads, parking areas or structures.
e. Preservation of existing native or speci-
men vegetation, including vegetation replanted
on site or elsewhere.
f. Compliance with all applicable federal,
state and municipal codes. (Ord. 13-191 § 1
(part))
39.04-02 Spaces
Buildings and outdoor space design shall
provide amenities for employees and public
use, including:
a. Shared driveways for accessing adjoin-
ing streets.
b. Linked internal vehicular circulation
systems and cross-access easements.
===PAGE 215===
39.04-03
112-14 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
c. Linked internal pedestrian systems with
adjoining sites.
d. Linked open space systems and bicy-
cle/pedestrian pathways.
e. Perimeter open space and landscape
buffers as required by Section 30.
f. Common location and access for refuse
collection.
g. Drainage and retention of storm water.
h. Infrastructure improvements and utility
easements.
(Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.04-03 Viewsheds
It is essential to preserve existing views
while incorporating the best views from the
subject property into the design. It is also
important to consider the probable impact of a
new development on future buildings and
developments. Two types of views are import-
ant and will be considered.
a. Views from within the Site
1. Protection of views of special features
such as the neighboring mountains.
2. Preservation of view corridors by the
placement of new buildings or trees.
b. Views into the Site
1. Identification of areas and corridors
from which the new development will be seen
from outside the site.
2. Minimize negative visual impact.
3. Alignment of courtyards, surface park-
ing and open spaces with view corridors from
adjacent sites. (Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.04-04 Building Placement and 
Orientation
a. Circulation
Building placement should allow for inter-
connected walkways and parking drives. This
has the advantage of  convenience and
enhanced pedest rian accessibility, increased
building exposure and enhanced safety.
b. Building Entries
Identifiable building en tries that consider
pedestrian use as well as motor vehicle uses are
encouraged.
c. Common Open Space
Buildings should be connected to and/or
clustered around common open spaces where
practicable.
d. Pedestrian Connectivity
A strong pedestrian connection should be
provided to the street edge and adjacent prop-
erties to promote connectivity and area-wide
pedestrian pathway and corridors.
e. Corner Buildings
1. The primary mass of a corner building
shall not be placed at an angle to the corner. 
2. Principal building entry shall be ori-
ented towards adjoining streets. 
3. Pedestrian access through the site
should be provided at the corner. 
4. Parking located in the rear. 
5. Design of buildings to mitigate any neg-
ative visual impact to adjacent residences and
public open space.

===PAGE 216===
39.04-05
112-15 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
(Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.04-05 Climatic Considerations
a. Building Orientation
When designing site for building placement,
summer heat gain is an important factor to con-
sider, and low afternoon/evening sun angles
cannot be effectively shaded or mitigated with
structural overhangs alone.
b. Courtyards
Courtyards that have southern and eastern
exposures and opportunities for shade from
overhead trellises and landscaping are encour-
aged.
c. Landscape Location
Landscape areas, rather than parking lots,
abutting the east and w est sides of courtyards
and buildings are encouraged. Arizona Depart-
ment of Water Resources approved trees
should be planted on south and west building
exposures.
d. Covered Parking
Covered parking is encouraged to provide
relief from summer heat and seasonal rains.
Parking structures shou ld be architecturally
compatible with the remainder of the develop-
ment.
--,. 1 
! 
I 
L 
c:lrlv./ldl"'CIOI 
t& 
s:~ 
1 · 
.,., f 
- ~~~ i ,. _.,,. 
UndMnsble 
DMcal;llr, 
pe,ti'G 
===PAGE 217===
39.04-06
112-16 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
(Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.04-06 Linkage and Circulation
a. Pedestrian Linkages
The location of pedestrian and vehicular cir-
culation patterns shall be coordinated with
adjacent sites, buildings and uses. Review cri-
teria include:
1. Provision of adequate space for pedes-
trian gatherings and pedestrian circulation. It is
desirable to develop a network of covered
arcades.
2. Interconnection of the project with
existing sidewalks and pathways. Intercon-
nected walkways should be designed with sim-
ilar and/or complementary details, colors,
finishes, and materials.
3. Interconnecting courtyards and pas-
sageways that interconnect and align with
existing courtyards in adjacent developments.
4. Pedestrian paths that are clearly visible
and provide visual links between neighboring
buildings and parking areas through the use of:
A. Covered arcades and walkways.
B. Courtyards.
C. Unified landscape design.
D. Consistent/complementary paving
materials.
E. Minimal interruption of pedestrian
paths by vehicular circulation and parking lots.
b. Courtyards
Courtyards and patios shall be included.
These spaces should be designed for the com-
fort and convenience of pedestrians. A court-
yard or plaza may serve as the focus of a site or
building. All open cour tyards or plazas shall
DNnblll 
~ 
===PAGE 218===
39.04-06
112-17 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
incorporate landscaping, shaded areas and seat-
ing. The edges of courtyards should contain
retail shops, restaurants, offices and pedestrian
activity. Blank walls should be minimized. Art
should be considered  to enliven common
spaces. 
c. Street Furniture
Seating, drinking fountains, trash recepta-
cles, and information directories should be
included in the pedestrian areas.
d. Outdoor Dining
Outdoor dining areas are encouraged and
should be used in conjunction with courtyards
and plazas. Outdoor dining should be oriented
away from noise generating activities.
e. Parking Lot Walkways
Safe, attractive pedestrian circulation to and
through parking areas shall be provided. Pedes-
trian circulation should be simple and generally
follow landscape islands and lead directly to
buildings. When it is necessary for pedestrians
to cross vehicular traffic flows, clearly delin-
eated crosswalks shall be provided. The use of
differing colors, textures and materials is
encouraged to delineate crosswalks. Bicycle
parking should be provided in a manner as not
to interfere with pedestrian movement. Parking
lots that contain four or more parallel rows of
parking shall include separated pedestrian
walks.
(Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
Oaieo,blB 
===PAGE 219===
39.04-07
112-18 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
39.04-07 Parking Lots
Parking areas shall be designed to reduce the
visual dominance of vehicles. Existing, healthy
trees and natural vegetation shall be preserved
whenever feasible. Parking areas shall: 
a. Be screened by bu ildings and landscap-
ing. 
b. Be screened from public view or sur-
rounded by landscaped buffers in order to buf-
fer visual intrusion and headlight glare. 
c. Be covered to provide visual screening.
Covered parking structures shall be architec-
turally compatible with the surrounding devel-
opment. When covered parking is not practical,
landscape islands shall be used to provide
visual buffering and shade.
d. Be designed to accommodate queuing
within internal drivew ays and not on through
streets.
e. Provide safe view angles and pedestrian
crossings at all intersections of driveways and
streets. (Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.04-08 Service Areas, Mechanical 
Equipment, Refuse Enclosures, 
etc.
a. Services Areas and Refuse Enclo-
sures
Service areas, loading zones and refuse
enclosures shall be located to the rear or side of
a building, or to an in ternal location, screened
from view from public streets, courtyards, pla-
zas, pedestrian corridors and neighboring prop-
erties. Refuse enclosures shall not be a visual
focal point from an entry driveway or principal
pedestrian access. Landscape planting to
screen views of service areas, loading zones
and refuse enclosure is required. Where feasi-
ble, service areas and refuse enclosures should
be clustered together in order to facilitate ser-
vice and greater effective screening. The
impact of these uses can be mitigated by:
1. Placement away from residential pedes-
trian oriented areas.
2. Construction of solid masonry walls
around the service area or refuse enclosure in a
manner to be compatible with the design of the
neighboring buildings. Refuse enclosures
should have nontransparent gate closures and a
side entrance.
3. Use of dense landscaping for screening
purposes.
4. Clustered service areas and refuse
enclosures.
b. Shopping Carts
Shopping carts shall be stored within the
building or screened with a wall that has been
designed as an integral component of the build-
ing’s architecture. 
c. Mechanical Equipment
Mechanical and electrical equipment, utility
cabinets, solar collector s, satellite dishes and
communication equipment shall be concealed
from view of public streets and neighboring
properties.
1. Utility cabinets and pedestals should
not be located within parking lot landscape
islands or public right s-of-way. Utility cabi-
nets, pedestals and other above ground utility
infrastructure should be clustered and screened
to the extent allowable by operational require-
ments. Such equipment shall be painted or
integrally colored a tone that is neutral to its
setting.
2. Rooftop and ground mounted mechani-
cal equipment and electrical service equipment
shall be screened from public view with mate-
rials architecturally compatible with the fin-
ishes and character of the principal structure.
All rooftop and ground mounted mechanical
and electrical equipment (including satellite
===PAGE 220===
39.04-09
112-19 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
dishes) shall be screened to a height of the tall-
est equipment and/or integrated with the build-
ing design.
3. Vending machines (freestanding or
attached) shall not be visible from the street or
neighboring properties.
4. The following equipment and uses shall
be screened:
A. Trash and refuse collection.
B. Mechanical equipment such as air con-
ditioners, pumps and motors.
C. Propane tanks and other storage tanks.
D. Electrical equipment including switch-
ing equipment and transformers.
E. Valves and vents.
F. Rooftop skylights (to prevent unwanted
light effects at night).
5. Surface/ground mounted equipment
such as air conditioners , tanks and dumpsters
shall be screened by appropriate walls and
fences and softened visually with vine and
shrub plantings.
(Ord. 13-191 § 1 (part))
39.04-09 Fences and Walls and Other 
Screening Devices
a. Acceptable Materials
Fences and walls that can be viewed by the
general public shall be architecturally compat-
ible with the principa l buildings in color,
design and materials. The following materials
are encouraged for use where visible to the
public:
1. Native stone.
2. Landscaped earth berms.
3. Vine covered trellises.
4. Textured block or stucco walls compat-
ible with adjacent bu ildings (painted CMU
block walls are acceptable but not encour-
aged).
5. Walls and fences greater than forty feet
in unbroken length should be designed to
increase shadow patterns, provide interesting
visual effects and reduce bulk/mass through
design elements, like wall undulation.
b. Unacceptable materials are:
1. Chain link or open wire fencing (except
in landscape screened service and security
areas); redwood slat inserts, with suitable
staining and landscape screening, are accept-
able where appropriate.
2. Razor wire.
3. Corrugated metal.
4. Plastic.
5. Nontextured or unfinished concrete or
block (CMU) walls for walls that can be

===PAGE 221===
39.04-10
112-20 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 15, 11-13)
viewed by the general public. (Ord. 13-191 § 1
(part))
39.04-10 Drive-Through Facilities
Drive-through facilities for banks, restau-
rants and drugstores shall be architecturally
integrated into the development and minimize
conflicts to surrounding vehicular and pedes-
trian patterns. Drive-through windows, menu
boards, sound equipment, stacking lanes and
headlight glare shall be located to minimize
impacts on adjacent uses and shall be screened
from public view. Arch itectural covering of
these areas is encouraged, but must be designed
as an integral part of the overall building
design. Menu board call-box volumes must be
controlled and monitored to not have sound
project beyond the property line. (Ord. 13-191
§ 1 (part))
===PAGE 222===
113 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
ZONING ORDINANCES LIST
Ordinance
Number
95-30 Amends § 4.05(b), amendments 
(4.05)
95-32 Amends zoning map to establish 
underlying zoning district 
classifications (Special)
96-33 Amends § 3.01(b), planning and 
zoning commission (3.01)
96-37 Amends §§ 3. 01(c)(1), (c)(2), 
(d)(1) and 3.04(c)(2)[(b)(2)], 
planning and zoning commission 
(3.01)
97-39 Rezone (Special)
97-41 Rezone (Special)
97-42 Adds § 31.17; amends §§ 2.04, 
3.02(h), 9.05(h) and 28; repeals 
and replaces § 29.01(u), group 
homes for the handicapped (2.04, 
3.02, 9.05)
97-44 Adds § 36; amends §§ 2, 28 and 
31.02(d)(1), wireless 
communications facilities (2.04, 
31.02, 36.01, 36.02, 36.03, 36.04, 
36.05, 36.06, 36.07, 36.08, 36.09, 
36.10, 36.11)
99-49 Amends § 36.04(c), wireless 
communications facilities (36.04)
99-53 Amends § 3.01(d)(3), planning and 
zoning commission (3.01)
99-54 Rezone (Special)
99-55 Amends § 35.32, temporary signs 
(Repealed by 14-197)
00-61 Adds § 31.18; amends § 2.04, yard 
sales (2.04, 31.18)
01-67 Amends Ord. 91-07, Village at 
Litchfield Park planned 
development (Not codified)
01-71 Adds § 20.05; amends §§ 20.01 
and 28, resort district and zoning 
matrix (20.01)
01-72 Amends zoning map (Special)
01-73 Amends zoning map (Special)
01-74 Adds § 27.07; amends § 27.01, 
public facilities district (27.01, 
27.07)
Ordinance
Number
02-77 Amends zoning map (Special)
02-78 Amends zoning map (Special)
02-79 Repeals § 5.02, fees (Repealer)
03-84 Amends zoning map (Special)
03-85 Adds § 4.05; renumbers §§ 4.05, 
4.06, 4.07 and 4.08 to be § 4.06, 
4.07, 4.08 and 4.09, amendments 
(4.05, 4.06, 4.07, 4.08, 4.09)
03-87 Amends Ord. 01-67, Village at 
Litchfield Park planned 
development (Not codified)
04-88 Amends Ord. 01-67, Village at 
Litchfield Park planned 
development (Not codified)
04-90 Adds specific penalty and §§ 35.31 
and 35.32; amends § 35.20; 
renumbers §§ 35.31 and 35.32 to 
be §§ 35.33 and 35.34, signs 
(Repealed by 14-197)
04-91 Adds §§ 3.05, 3.06, 4.09 [4.10], 
9.07, 25.04, 31.19, 31.20, 34.03, 
37, 38; amends §§ 1.02, 2.04, 3.01, 
3.03, 3.04, 4.02, 4.05 [4.06], 4.06 
[4.07], 4.08 [4.09], 9.01, 9.03, 
10.03, 11.03, 12.03, 13.03, 14.03, 
15.03, 16.03, 17.03, 18.03, 19.03, 
20.03, 21.03, 21.06, 22.03, 22.06, 
23.03, 23.06, 24.03, 26.01—26.03, 
27.03, 29.01—29.02, 30.01—
30.03, 32.02, 35.06, 35.20, various 
corrections; renames chapter title 
of § 29; repeals § 29.03 (1.02, 2.04, 
3.01, 3.03, 3.04, 3.05, 3.06, 4.02, 
4.05, 4.06, 4.08, 4.09, 9.01, 9.03, 
9.07, 10.03, 11.03, 12.03, 13.03, 
14.03, 15.03, 16.03, 17.03, 18.03, 
19.03, 20.03, 21.03, 21.06, 22.03, 
22.06, 23.03, 23.06, 24.03, 25.04, 
26.01, 26.02, 26.03, 27.03, 29.02, 
30.01, 30.02, 30.03, 31.19, 31.20, 
32.02, 34.03, 37.01, 37.02, 37.03, 
37.04, 38.01)
===PAGE 223===
ORDINANCE LIST
114 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
04-99 Amends Ord. 01-67, Village at 
Litchfield Park planned 
development (Not codified)
05-100 Amends §§ 3.01, 4.04 and 4.05, 
planning and zoning commission, 
amendments (3.01, 4.04, 4.05)
05-105 Amends § 31.04(a), screening of 
non-principal uses (31.04)
06-111 Adds specific penalty and 
§§ 16.06, 17.06 and 18.06; amends 
§§ 2.04, 20.01 and 28; renumbers 
§§ 16.06, 17.06 and 18.06 to be 
§§ 16.07, 17.07 and 18.07; repeals 
§ 20.05, condominiums (2.04, 
16.06, 16.07, 16.08, 17.06, 17.07, 
17.08, 18.06, 18.07, 18.08, 20.01)
06-112 Amends Ord. 91-07, Village at 
Litchfield Park planned 
development (Not codified)
06-113 Repeals and replaces § 8, 
violations, enforcement and 
penalties (8.01, 8.03, 8.04, 8.05, 
8.06, 8.07, 8.08, 8.09, 8.10)
06-116 Amends Ord. 91-07, Village at 
Litchfield Park planned 
development (Not codified)
06-117 Toll Brothers land exchange 
(Special)
07-128 Amends §§ 2.04 and 30.02, walls 
and fences (2.04, 30.02)
07-130 Amends § 3.04(c), design review 
board (3.04)
07-132 Amends §§ 2.04, 29.01 and 31.04, 
parking, storing and screening of 
vehicles (2.04, 31.04)
07-133 Amends §§ 3.03 and 3.04, minor 
design review applications (3.03, 
3.04)
07-134 Adds definition to Section 2; adds 
§ 3.07; amends §§ 4.03, 4.04, 9.03, 
26.02, 33.03 and 34.01, land use 
law (2.04, 3.07, 4.03, 4.04, 9.03, 
26.02, 33.03, 34.01)
08-135 Approves King Ranch planned 
area development; rezones 
property (Special)
08-139 Amends Ord. 99-54, zoning map 
and parcel restrictions (Special)
08-145 Amends Ord. 01-67, Village at 
Litchfield Park planned 
development (Not codified)
09-146 Adds § 30.02(d) and (e), 
landscaping and fences (30.02)
09-147 Repeals and replaces § 29, parking 
and loading regulations (29)
09-150 Rezone (Special)
10-156 Adds § 30.05, landscaping design 
standards and requirements (30.05)
11-160 Adds § 8.02; renumbers §§ 8.02 as 
8.03, 8.03 as 8.04, 8.05 as 8.06, 
8.07 as 8.08, 8.08 as 8.09 and 8.09 
as 8.10, violations, enforcement 
and penalties (8.02, 8.03, 8.04, 
8.05, 8.06, 8.07, 8.08, 8.09, 8.10)
11-162 Adds § 32.04(g); renumbers 
§ 32.04(g) as 32.04(h), 
nonconforming uses (32.04)
11-163 Amends §§ 2.04 and 31.03, 
accessory structures (2.04, 31.03)
11-165 Adds § 31.21; amends §§ 2.04 and 
28, medical marijuana dispensaries 
(Repealed by 11-166)
11-166 Adds § 31.21; amends §§ 2.04 and 
28, medical marijuana dispensaries 
(2.04, 31.21)
11-167 Adds § 31.21 [31.22]; amends 
§§ 2.04, 3.04(d)(8), solar energy 
collector panels (2.04, 3.04, 31.22)
11-168 Amends §§ 2.04, 28, 33.01, 33.03 
and 33.04; renumbers §§ 33.03 to 
33.02, 33.04 to 33.03 and 33.05 to 
33.04; repeals § 33.02, zoning 
(2.04, 33.01, 33.02, 33.03, 33.04)
12-176 Amends Ord. 08-135, King Ranch 
planned area development 
(Special)
12-177 Amends Ord. 01-67, Village at 
Litchfield Park planned 
development (Special)
12-178 Adds §§ 21.06(d), 22.06(d), 
23.06(d) and 24.06(c), master 
development plans (21.06, 22.06, 
23.06, 24.06)
12-179 School district land exchange 
(Special)
13-183 Amends §§ 21.01 and 28, zoning 
(21.01)
===PAGE 224===
ORDINANCE LIST
115 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
13-188 Adds § 31.03(d)(9); amends 
§§ 31.03(b)(2) and (f), accessory 
structures (31.03)
13-191 Adds § 39; amends § 3.04, design 
review guidelines (3.04, 39.01, 
39.02, 39.03, 39.04)
14-197 Amends § 2.04; repeals and 
replaces § 35, signs (2.04)
14-198 Amends §§ 3. 01(c)(1) and (2) and 
3.02(b), administration (3.01, 3.02)
15-201 Amends Ord. 91-07, zoning map 
(Special)
15-202 Amends Ord. 02-78, zoning map 
(Special)
15-203 Adds § 27A; amends §§ 2.04 and 
28, agritourism (2.04, 27A.01, 
27A.02, 27A.03, 27A.04, 27A.05, 
27A.06)
16-207 Amends § 31.18, yard sales (31.18)
16-211 Amends §§ 2.04, 27.01 and 28, 
farmers markets (2.04, 27.01)
16-214 Adds § 27B; amends § 28, 
commercial-flex district (27B, 28)
16-215 Amends Ord. 01-73, zoning map 
(Special)
18-223 Adds § 31.23; amends § 2.04, 
wireless facilities (2.04, 31.23)
18-227 Amends §§ 2.04, 28, 29.05 and 
29.13; repeals and replaces 
§ 31.17, group living facilities 
(2.04, 29.05, 29.13, 31.17)
19-231 Amends Ord. 08-135, King Ranch 
planned area development 
(Special)
19-233 Amends zoning map (Special)
19-236 Adds § 27C, city center (CTR) 
district (Repealed by 25-290)
20-246 Amends zoning map (Special)
20-247 Amends Ord. 20-246 amending 
zoning map (Special)
21-248 Adds § 31.24; amends §§ 2.04, 28 
and 31.21(a) and (b), recreational 
marijuana (2.04, 31.21, 31.24)
22-256 Amends § 35.08, temporary 
signage (Repealed by 24-286)
23-266 Amends § 31.04, screening of non-
principal uses (31.04)
23-267 Amends § 36.02, wireless 
communications facilities (36.02)
23-272 Adds § 31.17(f), group living 
facilities (31.17)
24-279 Amends §§ 2.04 and 29.05(a), 
parking and loading regulations 
(2.04, 29.05)
24-286 Repeals and replaces Ch. 35, signs 
(35.01, 35.02, 35.03, 35.04, 35.05, 
35.06, 35.07, 35.08, 35.09, 35.10, 
35.11)
25-290 Repeals and replaces §§ 27C and 
zoning matrix in § 28, zoning 
(27C.01, 27C.02, 27C.03, 27C.04, 
28)
===PAGE 225===
ACCESSORY USES, STRUCTURES
ZI-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
ZONING INDEX
(Indexer’s Note: Numbers preceded by “Section” 
refer to major divisions within the Zoning Code, 
and all other numbers refer to subdivisions within 
the major divisions.)
— A —
ACCESSORY USES, STRUCTURES
Regulations generally  31.03
ADJUSTMENT BOARD
See BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT  Section 3
ADMINISTRATION
See ZONING CODE  Section 3
ADMINISTRATOR
See ZONING CODE  Section 3
AGRITOURISM (AT) DISTRICT
See AT DISTRICT  Section 27A
AMENDMENTS
See ZONING CODE  Section 4
ANNEXATIONS
Zoning designations when  9.03
APPEALS
Administrative decisions appeals  3.02
Design review approval decisions  3.04
Group living facility decisions  31.17
AT DISTRICT
Additional regulations  27A.06
Height regulations  27A.04
Land use definition  27A.01
Property development standards  27A.03
Setback regulations  27A.05
Use regulations  27A.02
— B —
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Purpose, composition, organization, duties, 
responsibilities  3.02
BUFFER YARD REGULATIONS
AT district  27A.03
CF district  27B.03
CS district  22.03
I district  24.03
MFH district  18.03
MFL district  16.03
MFM district  17.03
NC district  21.03
PF district  27.03
PH district  19.03
RC cluster district  15.03
RS district  23.03
RT district  20.03
BUILDINGS
See also specific subject within this index
Distance between buildings
designated, designated districts
Section  28
MFH district  18.03
MFL district  16.03
MFM district  17.03
NC district  21.03
PH district  19.03
RC cluster district  15.03
regulations generally  31.10
Zoning Matrix  Section 28
Storage buildings, regulations  31.11
Temporary buildings, regulations  31.09
===PAGE 226===
BUILDINGS, TEMPORARY
ZI-2 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 22, 12-19)
BUILDINGS, TEMPORARY
Regulations  31.09
— C —
CF DISTRICT
Land use definition  27B.01
Property development standards  27B.03
Use regulations  27B.02
CITY CENTER (CTR) DISTRICT
See CTR DISTRICT  Section 27C
CODE
See ZONING CODE  Section 1
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial-flex (CF) district
See CF DISTRICT  Section 27B
Community commercial (CS) district
See CS DISTRICT  Section 22
Neighborhood commercial (NC) district
See NC DISTRICT  Section 21
Regional commercial (RS) district See RS 
DISTRICT  Section 23
COMMERCIAL-FLEX (CF) DISTRICT
See CF DISTRICT  Section 27B
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
See WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS 
FACILITIES  Section 36
COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (CS) DISTRICT
See CS DISTRICT  Section 22
CS DISTRICT
Additional regulations  22.06
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  22.04
Land use definition  22.01
Property development standards  22.03
Setback regulations  22.05
Use regulations  22.02
CTR DISTRICT
Land use definition  27C.01
Design criteria  27C.04
Property development standards  27C.03
Use regulations  27C.02
— D —
DEFINITIONS
Generally  2.04
Parking, loading regulations  29.03
Purpose of provisions  2.01
Sign definitions  35.02
Text brevity terms  2.03
Walls, landscaping, fences regulations  30.01
Word usage  2.02
DENSITY
Designated, designated districts  Section 28
Zoning Matrix  Section 28
DESIGN REVIEW
Approval
PD district, requirements  26.03
procedure, criteria  3.04
Guidelines
commercial, industrial
architectural design  39.03
site design  39.04
residential architectural design
multifamily  39.02
single-family  39.01
===PAGE 227===
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
ZI-2-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 22, 12-19)
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
Purpose, composition, organization, duties, 
responsibilities  3.04
DEVELOPMENT AREA
Designated, designated districts  Section 28
MFH district  18.03
MFL district  16.03
MFM district  17.03
NC district  21.03
PH district  19.03
===PAGE 228===
DEVELOPMENT COVERAGE
ZI-3 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 19, 2-17)
RC cluster district  15.03
RT district  20.03
Zoning Matrix  Section 28
DEVELOPMENT COVERAGE
RT district  20.03
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
See PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT 
STANDARDS  10.03
DEVELOPMENT WIDTH
RT district  20.03
DISTRICTS
Annexed territory
zoning designations when  9.03
Boundaries
designated  9.02
vacated street, alley, way, effect  9.04
Maps
See MAPS  Section 9
Overlay districts
Purpose, established, designated  9.01
Requirements compliance  9.05
Vacated street, alley, way, effect  9.04
DWELLING UNIT SIZE, MINIMUM
PH district  19.03
— E —
ENCLOSURE REGULATIONS
PF district  27.06
RT district  20.04
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS
Regulations  31.19
EXTERIOR LIGHTING REGULATIONS
AT district  27A.06
CF district 27B.03
CS district  22.06
Generally  31.15
I district  24.06
MFH district  18.07
MFL district  16.07
MFM district  17.07
NC district  21.06
OS district  25.03
PF district  27.06
PH district  19.06
R1 district  11.06
R1-6 district  14.06
R1-8 district  13.06
R1-15 district  12.06
RC cluster district  15.06
RE district  10.06
RS district  23.06
RT district  20.04
— F —
FEES
Impact fees  5.04
Schedule  5.01
Sign permit fees  35.03
Waiver, refund  5.03
Wireless communications facilities use 
permit fees  36.07
FENCES
See WALLS, LANDSCAPING, FENCES  
Section 30
— G —
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (I) DISTRICT
See I DISTRICT  Section 24
===PAGE 229===
GROUP LIVING FACILITIES
ZI-4 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 22, 12-19)
GROUP LIVING FACILITIES
Regulations generally  31.17
— H —
HEIGHT REGULATIONS
Accessory buildings, structures  31.03
AT district  27A.04
CF district 27B.03
CS district  22.04
CTR district  27C.03
Designated, designated districts  Section 28
Fences  30.02
Flagpoles  35.09
I district  24.04
Landscaping  30.02
MFH district  18.04
MFL district  16.04
MFM district  17.04
NC district  21.04
PF district  27.04
PH district  19.04
R1 district  11.04
R1-6 district  14.04
R1-8 district  13.04
R1-15 district  12.04
RC cluster district  15.04
RE district  10.04
RS district  23.04
Safety considerations  31.13
Signs
commercial  35.06
generally  35.03, 35.04
residential, public facility  35.05
resort  35.07
temporary  35.08
Special height regulations  31.02
Walls  30.02
Wireless communications facilities  36.04
Zoning Matrix  Section 28
HIGH DENSITY MULTIFAMILY (MFH) 
DISTRICT
See MFH DISTRICT  Section 18
HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (RC 
CLUSTER) DISTRICT
See RC CLUSTER DISTRICT  Section 15
HIGH MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL 
(R1-6) DISTRICT
See R1-6 DISTRICT  Section 14
— I —
I DISTRICT
Additional regulations  24.06
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  24.04
Land use definition  24.01
Property development standards  24.03
Setback regulations  24.05
Use regulations  24.02
IMPACT FEES
Purpose, applicability, schedule  5.04
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
General industrial (I) district 
See I DISTRICT  Section 24
— L —
LANDSCAPING
See WALLS, LANDSCAPING, FENCES  
Section 30
===PAGE 230===
LIGHTING REGULATIONS
ZI-5 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 19, 2-17)
LIGHTING REGULATIONS
See EXTERIOR LIGHTING 
REGULATIONS  10.06
LOADING REQUIREMENTS, OFF-STREET
See also PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Designated uses  29.12
LOT AREA
AT district  27A.03
CF district 27B.03
CS district  22.03
Designated, designated districts  Section 28
I district  24.03
MFH district  18.03
MFL district  16.03
MFM district  17.03
NC district  21.03
PF district  27.03
PH district  19.03
R1 district  11.03
R1-6 district  14.03
R1-8 district  13.03
R1-15 district  12.03
RC cluster district  15.03
RE district  10.03
RS district  23.03
RT district  20.03
Zoning Matrix  Section 28
LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
MFH district  18.03
MFL district  16.03
MFM district  17.03
RC cluster district  15.03
LOT COVERAGE
Accessory uses, structures  31.03
AT district  27A.03
CF district 27B.03
CS district  22.03
Designated, designated districts  Section 28
I district  24.03
MFH district  18.03
MFL district  16.03
MFM district  17.03
NC district  21.03
PF district  27.03
PH district  19.03
R1 district  11.03
R1-6 district  14.03
R1-8 district  13.03
R1-15 district  12.03
RC cluster district  15.03
RE district  10.03
RS district  23.03
RT district  20.03
Zoning Matrix  Section 28
LOT WIDTH
AT district  27A.03
CS district  22.03
Designated, designated districts  Section 28
I district  24.03
NC district  21.03
PF district  27.03
R1 district  11.03
R1-6 district  14.03
R1-8 district  13.03
R1-15 district  12.03
RE district  10.03
RS district  23.03
RT district  20.03
Zoning Matrix  Section 28
LOW DENSITY MULTIFAMILY (MFL) 
DISTRICT
See MFL DISTRICT  Section 16
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1) DISTRICT
See R1 DISTRICT  Section 11
===PAGE 231===
LOW MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1-15) DISTRICT
ZI-6 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
LOW MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
(R1-15) DISTRICT
See R1-15 DISTRICT  Section 12
— M —
MAPS
Adoption  9.02
Amendment, procedure
See ZONING CODE  Section 4
Appended to code, contents  9.06
MARIJUANA
Designated districts  Section 28
Dispensary, cultivation regulations  31.21
Recreational  31.24
MATRIX
Zoning Matrix  Section 28
MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIFAMILY (MFM) 
DISTRICT
See MFM DISTRICT  Section 17
MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1-6) 
DISTRICT, HIGH
See R1-6 DISTRICT  Section 14
MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1-8) 
DISTRICT
See R1-8 DISTRICT  Section 13
MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1-15) 
DISTRICT, LOW
See R1-15 DISTRICT  Section 12
MFH DISTRICT
Additional regulations  18.07
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  18.04
Land use definition  18.01
Property development standards  18.03
Residential condominum projects  18.06
Setback regulations  18.05
Use regulations  18.02
Violation, penalty  18.08
MFL DISTRICT
Additional regulations  16.07
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  16.04
Land use definition  16.01
Property development standards  16.03
Residential condominum projects  16.06
Setback regulations  16.05
Use regulations  16.02
Violation, penalty  16.08
MFM DISTRICT
Additional regulations  17.07
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  17.04
Land use definition  17.01
Property development standards  17.03
Residential condominum projects  17.06
Setback regulations  17.05
Use regulations  17.02
Violation, penalty  17.08
MULTIFAMILY DISTRICTS
Low density multifamily (MFL) district
See MFL DISTRICT  Section 16
Medium density multifamily (MFM)
See MFM DISTRICT  Section 17
===PAGE 232===
MULTIFAMILY (MFH) DISTRICT
ZI-6-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 23, 10-21)
MULTIFAMILY (MFH) DISTRICT
High density multifamily (MFH) district
See MFH DISTRICT  Section 18
— N —
NC DISTRICT
Additional regulations  21.06
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  21.04
===PAGE 233===
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC) DISTRICT
ZI-7 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 21, 7-18)
Land use definition  21.01
Property development standards  21.03
Setback regulations  21.05
Use regulations  21.02
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC) 
DISTRICT
See NC DISTRICT  Section 21
NONCONFORMING USES
Continuance permitted when, conditions
alterations  32.02
continued use  32.01
special circumstances  32.04
Destruction, regulations when  32.03
Discontinuance, regulations when  32.03
Signs
See SIGNS  Section 35
— O —
OPEN SPACE (OS) DISTRICT
See OS DISTRICT  Section 25
OS DISTRICT
Additional regulations  25.03
District changes, rezoning  25.04
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Land use definition  25.01
Use regulations  25.02
— P —
PARKING REQUIREMENTS
See also LOADING REQUIREMENTS, 
OFF-STREET
Applicability  29.01
Calculation considerations  29.06
Definitions  29.03
Dimensions, circulation  29.07
General design requirements  29.08
Handicapped parking  29.10
Locations  29.05
Purpose, intent  29.02
Requirements  29.04
Residential use restrictions  29.11
Surfacing improvements  29.09
Use matrix  29.13
Violation, penalties  29.14
PATHWAY IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
Regulations  31.20
PATIO HOME RESIDENTIAL (PH) DISTRICT
See PH DISTRICT  Section 19
PD DISTRICT
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Land use definition  26.01
Planned development
application, contents  26.02
design criteria  26.03
modifications  26.04
property development standards designated  
26.03
PERMITS
See also USE PERMITS  Section 33
Flag, sign pole permits  35.09
Sign permits  35.03, 35.09
Yard sale  31.18
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY
Group living facility, regulations generally  
31.17
===PAGE 234===
PF DISTRICT
ZI-8 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 22, 12-19)
PF DISTRICT
Additional regulations  27.06
Care developments continuum  27.07
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  27.04
Land use definition  27.01
Property development standards  27.03
Setback regulations  27.05
Use regulations  27.02
PH DISTRICT
Additional regulations  19.06
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  19.04
Land use definition  19.01
Property development standards  19.03
Setback regulations  19.05
Use regulations  19.02
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICT
See PD DISTRICT  Section 26
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Purpose, composition, organization, duties, 
responsibilities  3.01
PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
AT district  27A.03
CF district  27B.03
CS district  22.03
CTR district  27C.03
Designated, designated districts  Section 28
I district  24.03
MFH district  18.03
MFL district  16.03
MFM district  17.03
NC district  21.03
PD district  26.03
PF district  27.03
PH district  19.03
R1 district  11.03
R1-6 district  14.03
R1-8 district  13.03
R1-15 district  12.03
RC cluster district  15.03
RE district  10.03
RS district  23.03
RT district  20.03
Signs
commercial  35.06
generally  35.03, 35.04
residential, public facility  35.05
resort  35.07
temporary  35.08
Wireless communications facilities
radio frequency standards, interference, 
noise  36.06
site, construction standards  36.04
Zoning Matrix  Section 28
PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT PLANS
Applications, regulations  38.01
PUBLIC FACILITIES (PF) DISTRICT
See PF DISTRICT  Section 27
— R —
R1 DISTRICT
Additional regulations  11.06
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  11.04
Land use definition  11.01
Property development standards  11.03
Setback regulations  11.05
Use regulations  11.02
===PAGE 235===
R1-6 DISTRICT
ZI-8-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 22, 12-19)
R1-6 DISTRICT
Additional regulations  14.06
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  14.04
===PAGE 236===
R1-8 DISTRICT
ZI-9 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 19, 2-17)
Land use definition  14.01
Property development standards  14.03
Setback regulations  14.05
Use regulations  14.02
R1-8 DISTRICT
Additional regulations  13.06
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  13.04
Land use definition  13.01
Property development standards  13.03
Setback regulations  13.05
Use regulations  13.02
R1-15 DISTRICT
Additional regulations  12.06
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  12.04
Land use defmition  12.01
Property development standards  12.03
Setback regulations  12.05
Use regulations  12.02
RC CLUSTER DISTRICT
Additional regulations  15.06
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  15.04
Land use definition  15.01
Property development standards  15.03
Setback regulations  15.05
Use regulations  15.02
RE DISTRICT
Additional regulations  10.06
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  10.04
Land use definition  10.01
Property development standards  10.03
Setback regulations  10.05
Use regulations  10.02
REGIONAL COMMERCIAL (RS) DISTRICT
See RS DISTRICT  Section 23
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial-flex (CF) district
See CF DISTRICT  Section 27B
High density multifamily (MFH) district
See MFH DISTRICT  Section 18
High density residential (RC cluster) district
See RC CLUSTER DISTRICT  Section 15
High medium density residential (R1-6) 
district
See R1-6 DISTRICT  Section 14
Low density multifamily (MFL) district  
Section 16
Low density residential (R1) district
See R1 DISTRICT  Section 11
Low medium density residential (R1-15) 
district
See R1-15 DISTRICT  Section 12
Medium density multifamily (MFM) district
See MFM DISTRICT  Section 17
Medium density residential (R1-8) district
See R1-8 DISTRICT  Section 13
Patio home residential (PH) district
See PH DISTRICT  Section 19
Residential estate (RE) district
See RE DISTRICT  Section 10
RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS
MFH district  18.06
MFL district  16.06
MFM district  17.06
===PAGE 237===
RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE (RE) DISTRICT
ZI-10 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 28, 4-25)
RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE (RE) DISTRICT
See RE DISTRICT  Section 10
RESORT (RT) DISTRICT
See RT DISTRICT  Section 20
RS DISTRICT
Additional regulations  23.06
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Height regulations  23.04
Land use definition  23.01
Property development standards  23.03
Setback regulations  23.05
Use regulations  23.02
RT DISTRICT
Additional regulations  20.04
Established, designated  9.01
General district regulations
See DISTRICTS  Section 9
Land use definition  20.01
Property development standards  20.03
Use regulations  20.02
— S —
SCREENING REGULATIONS
Non-principal uses  31.04
Wireless communications facilities  36.04
SETBACK REGULATIONS
Accessory uses, structures  31.03
AT district  27A.05
CF district  27B.03
CS district  22.05
CTR district  27C.03
I district  24.05
MFH district  18.05
MFL district  16.05
MFM district  17.05
NC district  21.05
PF district  27.05
PH district  19.05
R1 district  11.05
R1-6 district  14.05
R1-8 district  13.05
R1-15 district  12.05
RC cluster district  15.05
RE district  10.05
RS district  23.05
Signs
commercial  35.06
generally  35.03
residential, public facility  35.05
temporary  35.08
Wireless communications facilities  36.04
SIGNS
Comprehensive sign program  35.04
Definitions  35.02
Flagpole requirements  35.09
General requirements  35.03
Nonconforming signs  35.10
Permit requirements  35.03
Prohibited  35.07
Purpose, objectives of provisions  35.01
Resort districts  35.06
Standards  35.05
Temporary signage  35.08
Violation, penalty  35.11
SITE PLAN REVIEW
Appeals  37.04
Application requirements  37.02
AT district  27A.03
Criteria  37.03
Generally  37.01
===PAGE 238===
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR PANELS
ZI-11 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 22, 12-19)
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR PANELS
Regulations  31.22
STORAGE REGULATIONS
Generally  31.11
STORMWATER DRAINAGE REGULATIONS
AT district  27A.06
CF district  27B.03
CS district  22.06
Generally  31.16
I district  24.06
MFH district  18.07
MFL district  16.07
MFM district  17.07
NC district  21.06
OS district  25.03
PF district  27.06
PH district  19.06
R1 district  11.06
R1-6 district  14.06
R1-8 district  13.06
R1-15 district  12.06
RC cluster district  15.06
RE district  10.06
RS district  23.06
RT district  20.04
— T —
TEMPORARY BUILDINGS
Regulations  31.09
TIME-SHARE PROJECTS
Prohibited, designated districts  31.14
— U —
USE PERMITS
Application review procedures  33.02
Approval
procedures  33.02
Purpose of provisions  33.01
Revocation when  33.03
RT district, required when  20.04
Termination, automatic, when  33.04
Wireless communications facilities  36.03
USE REGULATIONS
See also NONCONFORMING USES
Section 32
Accessory uses, structures  31.03
AT district  27A.02
CF district  27B.03
CS district  22.02
CTR district  27C.02
Designated uses, designated districts 
Section  28
Fences
See WALLS, LANDSCAPING, FENCES  
Section 30
Group living facilities  31.17
Height regulations
See also HEIGHT REGULATIONS 
Section  10.04
special height regulations  31.02
I district  24.02
Intent of provisions  31.01
Landscaping
See WALLS, LANDSCAPING, FENCES 
Section  30
Loading requirements, off-street, designated 
uses  29.12
MFH district  18.02
MFL district  16.02
MFM district  17.02
NC district  21.02
Nonconforming uses
See NONCONFORMING USES Section  32
OS district  25.02
Parking requirements, designated uses  29.13
PF district  27.02
===PAGE 239===
USE REGULATIONS
ZI-11-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 22, 12-19)
PH district  19.02
R1 district  11.02
R1-6 district  14.02
R1-8 district  13.02
===PAGE 240===
UTILITY POLES, WIRES
ZI-12 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 20, 6-18)
R1-15 district  12.02
RC cluster district  15.02
RE district  10.02
RS district  23.02
RT district  20.02
Screening regulations
non-principal uses  31.04
wireless communications facilities  36.04
Signs
See SIGNS  Section 35
Temporary buildings  31.09
Walls
See WALLS, LANDSCAPING, FENCES  
Section 30
Yard regulations
See YARD REGULATIONS  Section 31
Zoning Matrix  Section 28
UTILITY POLES, WIRES
Wireless communications facilities, use 
regulations  36.04
— V —
VARIANCES
Alternative prevailing standards  34.03
Application
contents  34.01
Authorization
conditions, findings required  34.02
Procedure generally, hearing  3.02
— W —
WALLS, LANDSCAPING, FENCES
Definitions  30.01
Design regulations  30.02
Height regulations  30.02
Property owner responsibility  30.04
Right-of-way, easement, placement 
prohibited  30.03
Safety considerations  31.13
Wireless communications facilities  36.04
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Applicability of provisions  36.11
Co-location, requirements, regulations  36.05
Permit
See Use permit  36.03
Permitted
facilities designated  36.03
locations  36.02
Purpose of provisions  36.01
Right-of-way regulations  31.23
Standards
radio frequency standards, interference, 
noise  36.06
site, construction standards  36.04
Use permit
application, contents, fees  36.07
approval process  36.08
renewal  36.10
required, designated facilities  36.03
term, conditions, revocation when  36.09
— Y —
YARD REGULATIONS
AT district
buffer yards  27A.03
generally  27A.05
Buffer yards
AT district  27A.03
CF district  27B.03
CS district  22.03
I district  24.03
MFH district  18.03
MFL district  16.03
MFM district  17.03
NC district  21.03
PF district  27.03
PH district  19.03
===PAGE 241===
YARD REGULATIONS
ZI-12-1 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 20, 6-18)
RC cluster district  15.03
RS district  23.03
RT district  20.03
CF district  27B.03
Cluster residences  31.08
CS district
buffer yards  22.03
generally  22.05
Designated, designated districts  Section 28
Exceptions  31.06
Front yard adjustments  31.12
I district
buffer yards  24.03
generally  24.05
MFH district
buffer yards  18.03
generally  18.05
MFL district
buffer yards  16.03
generally  16.05
MFM district
buffer yards  17.03
generally  17.05
NC district
buffer yards  21.03
generally  21.05
PF district
buffer yards  27.03
generally  27.05
PH district  19.05
buffer yards  19.03
Porches, patios, projection into yards  31.07
R1 district  11.05
R1-6 district  14.05
R1-8 district  13.05
R1-15 district  12.05
RC cluster district
buffer yards  15.03
generally  15.05
RE district  10.05
RS district
buffer yards  23.03
generally  23.05
RT district
buffer yards  20.03
Structures in yard areas  31.05
Zoning Matrix  Section 28
===PAGE 242===
YARD SALES
ZI-13 (Litchfield Park Zoning Supp. No. 9, 3-11)
YARD SALES
Regulations generally  31.18
— Z —
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
Designated, duties, responsibilities  3.03
ZONING CODE
See also specific subject within this index
Administration, scope, authority
appeals pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 9-500.12 and 
9-500.13  3.05
board of adjustment  3.02
design review board  3.04
land use law changes  3.07
planning and zoning commission  3.01
reconsideration of decisions  3.06
zoning administrator  3.03
Amendments
application
See also hearing  4.06
contents  4.04
citizen review process  4.05
general plan  4.10
hearing
notice  4.06
procedures, decision  4.07
protests, procedure, effect  4.08
initiation  4.03
introductory provisions  4.01
maps
See also specific subject within this 
heading
approval, denial, effect  4.09
protests, procedure, effect  4.08
types designated  4.02
Conflicting provisions, resolution  6.02
Consistency with state, federal laws  1.04
Definitions
See DEFINITIONS  Section 2
Effective date  7.02
Enforcement, scope, authority
planning and zoning commission  3.01
zoning administrator  3.03
Intent of provisions  1.03
Interpretation  6.01
Purpose of provisions  1.02
Saving clause  7.01
Title of provisions  1.01
Violation
citations  8.06
city reliance on information supplied  8.02
code enforcement officer  8.03
cumulative procedures, remedies  8.09
enforcement responsibilities  8.04
evidence of identity, failure to provide  8.10
invalid permits, approvals  8.01
notice, opportunity to correct  8.05
penalties
general  8.07
habitual offenders  8.08
ZONING COMMISSION
See PLANNING AND ZONING 
COMMISSION  Section 3
ZONING MAPS
See MAPS  Section 9
ZONING MATRIX
Designated, contents  Section 28
